oTACk ANN  cA
B
Ex  Libris C.  K.  OGDEN
THE   TEMPLE  T>RJMJTISTS ARDEN    OF   FEVERSHAM
f^'
The  text  of  this  edition  is  nearly  that  of  the  first
Quarto,  the  copy  of  which  in  the  Dyce  Library
at  South  Kensington  has  been  carefully  collated.
I  have  not  noted  minute  variations.    The  German
editors,   Warnke   and   Proescholt,  give  the
various  readings  of  the  three  Quartos
and  of  later  editions.
'Considering  the  various  and  marvellous  gifts  dis- played for  the  first  time  on  our  stage  by  the  great poet,  the  great  dramatist,  the  strong  and  subtle searcher  of  hearts,  the  just  and  merciful  judge  and painter  of  human  passions,  who  gave  this  tragedy  to the  new-born  literature  of  our  drama  ...  I  cannot but  finally  take  heart  to  say,  even  in  the  absence  of  all external  or  traditional  testimony,  that  it  seems  to  me not  pardonable  merely  or  permissible,  but  simply logical  and  reasonable,  to  set  down  this  poem,  a young  man's  work  on  the  face  of  it,  as  the  possible work  of  no  man"s  youthful  hand  but  Shakespeare's.' Mr.  A.  C.  Swinburne.
PREFACE
Early  Editions.  On  3rd  April,  1592,  *  The  Tragedie  of Arden  of  Fever  sham  and  BlackwalV^  was  entered  on  the Stationers'  Registers  to  Edward  White.  In  the  same  year appeared,  *  The  lamentable  and  true  Tragedie  of  M.  Arden  of Feversham  in  Kent.  Who  was  most  wickedlye  murdered,  by the  meanes  of  his  disloyall  and  wanton  wyfe^  who  for  the  love she  bare  to  one  Mosbie,  hyred  two  desperat  rujffins,  Blackwill and  Shakbagy  to  kill  him.  Wherin  is  shewed  the  great  mallice and  discimulation  of  a  wicked  womanly  the  unsatiable  desire of  fit  hie  lust  and  the  shamefttll  end  of  all  murderers.  Im- printed at  London  for  Edward  White,  dwelling  at  the  lyttle North  dore  cf  Patiles  Church  at  the  signe  of  the  Gun.  1592.' A  second  Quarto,  with  the  same  title,  was  printed  in  1599.  A third,  *  by  Eliz.  Allde  dwelling  neere  Christs  Church,^  appeared in  1633.  The  second  and  third  Quartos  are  founded  textually upon  the  first,  and  their  variations  are  of  no  value.  The  text of  the  first  Quarto  is  unusually  good  even  when  prose  and verse  are  mixed  together,  although  the  printer  has  apparently no  scientific  knowledge  of  the  nature  of  metre.
Place  of  the  Play  in  the  Elizabethan  Drama.     Arden  of Faversham  is  the  finest  extant  specimen  of  a  kind  of  play  which 1  A  misprint  for  Blackwill. V
PREFACE  Arden  of  Feversham
has  been  classified  as  Domestic  Tragedy.  A  picturesque  or sensational  murder  in  the  sixteenth  century  was  given  to  the public  first  in  popular  ballads  or  pamphlets,  and  afterwards,  if sufficiently  notable,  in  the  more  serious  Chronicle.  From  the popular  pamphlet,  or  from  the  Chronicle,  or  from  both  together, it  found  its  way  on  to  the  stage.  Four  of  these  *  murder- plays' have  come  down  to  us,  and  the  titles  of  many  others.  They form  a  minor  section  of  the  Chronicle  plays  or  Histories.  They did  not  attain  any  very  striking  literary  development,  owing perhaps  to  the  necessary  bondage  of  the  poet  to  his  facts. Arden  of  Faversham  is  a  remarkable  instance  of  the  possi- bilities of  this  class  of  play,  but  it  is  to  be  noted  that  the  poet used  the  narrative  of  a  Chronicler  who  wrote  twenty-seven years  after  the  date  of  the  murder.  A  Warning  for  Fair Women  and  Yarington's  Two  Tragedies  in  One  are  both  inferior to  Arden,  though  influenced  by  it.  The  fourth  *  murder-play ' —  The  Yorkshire  Tragedy — is  distinct  from  the  other  three in  style  and  method.  Several  famous  dramatists  produced '  domestic '  tragedies,  but  none  have  survived.  A  Late  Murder of  the  Son  upon  the  Mother^  in  which  Ford  and  Webster  colla- borated, must  have  been  a  notable  piece  of  work.
Source  of  the  Play.  On  Sunday,  15th  February  1550-1, Thomas  Ardern  of  Faversham,  gentleman,  *  was  heynously murdered  in  his  own  parlour,  about  seven  of  the  clock  in  the night,  by  one  Thomas  Morsby,  a  taylor  of  London,  late  servant to  sir  Edward  North,  knight,  chancellor  of  the  augmentations, father-in-law  unto  Alice  Ardern,  wife  of  the  said  Thomas Ardern.'  Thomas  Ardern  was  Mayor  of  Faversham  in  1548, and  his  murder  made  such  a  stir  that  in  1577  the  first  edition vi
Arden  of  Feversham  preface
of  Holinshed's  Chronicle  devotes  five  pages  (pp.  1703-8)  to  an elaborate  account  of  it.  The  chronicler  begins  thus  : — *  About this  time  there  was  at  Faversham  in  Kent  a  Gentleman  named Arden  most  cruelly  murthered  and  slain  by  the  procurement  of his  own  wife.  The  which  murder  for  the  horribleness  thereof, although  otherwise  it  may  seem  to  be  but  a  private  matter,  and therefore  as  it  were  impertinent  to  this  History,  I  have  thought good  to  set  it  forth  somewhat  at  large,  having  the  instructions delivered  to  me  by  them  that  have  used  some  diligence  to gather  the  true  understanding  of  the  circumstances.'  Our  first quotation  was  from  the  Wardmote  Book  of  Faversham^  and proves  that  Holinshed's  narrative  is  not  minutely  accurate. The  Wardmote  Book  gives  a  curt  account  of  the  actual  murder on  the  Sunday  evening  with  the  names  and  fate  of  the  culprits. It  tells  us  nothing  of  the  previous  failures  of  these  culprits  which give  to  Holinshed's  tale  such  a  terrible  and  dramatic  interest. We  need  not  speculate  on  Holinshed's  sources.  No  doubt there  were  many  contemporary  pamphlets  and  ballads  which recounted  the  murder.  We  know  only  of  The  Complaint  .  .  . of  Mistress  Arden  of  Feversham^  preserved  among  the  Rox- burghe  Ballads,  and  reprinted  by  Evans  and  in  Miss  De Vaynes'  Kentish  Garland.  But  this  is  dated  by  Mr.  Bullen about  1633,  when  the  third  Quarto  of  the  play  appeared,  and was  probably  occasioned  by  that  re-issue.  The  important point  to  bear  in  mind  is  the  excellence  of  Holinshed's  narrative. To  praise  it  adequately  we  must  say  that  it  is  worthy  of  the  fine play  founded  upon  it,  which  probably  had  no  other  source. The  play  agrees  always  with  Holinshed  when  Holinshed  differs from  the  Wardmote  Book.  When  the  play  differs  from  Holin- shed it  differs  also  from  the  Wardmote  Book.  To  the  dramatic vii
PREFACE  Arden  of  Feversham
instinct  of  the  poet  we  must  ascribe  his  suppression  of  the  fact that  Arden  winked  at  his  wife's  infidelity.  Holinshed  and  the Wardmott  Book  both  explicitly  assert  this.  Franklin,  Arden's friend,  is  also  an  invention  of  the  dramatist.
Author  of  the  Play.  The  three  Quartos  are  all  anonymous. We  know  of  no  other  edition  till  1770,  when  Edward  Jacob, a  Faversham  antiquary,  edited  the  first  Quarto,  and  boldly claimed  the  play  for  Shakespeare.  Ludwig  Tieck  published  in 1823  an  excellent  German  translation,  accompanied  by  a  dis- criminating statement  of  the  case  for  the  Shakesperean  author- ship. Delius,  editing  the  play  in  1855,  agreed  with  Tieck,  and was  followed  by  the  French  translator,  Fran9ois  Victor  Hugo, and  more  recently  by  Professor  Mezieres.  Owing  to  the  sup- posed Shakespearean  authorship  there  have  been  at  least  three translations  into  German,  one  into  French,  and  one  into  Dutch. In  England  opinion  has  been  more  divided.  Henry  Tyrrell,^ Charles  Knight,  and  Mr.  Swinburne ^  have  supported  the  Shake- spearean authorship.  .  Professor  Ward'  and  J.  A.  Symonds inchne  to  reject  it.  Professor  Saintsbury  considers  that  'the only  possible  hypothesis  on  which  it  could  be  admitted  as Shakespeare's  would  be  that  of  an  early  experiment  thrown  off while  he  was  seeking  his  way  in  a  direction  where  he  found  no thoroughfare.'*  Mr.  Bullen,  who  edited  a  careful  reprint  of  the first  Quarto  in  1887,  suspects  *that  Arden  in  its  present  state has  been  retouched  here  and  there   by  the   master's  hand.*
1  Doultful  Plays  of  Shakespeare.  2  Study  of  Shakespeart.
•  History  of  English  Dramatic  Literature.
*  History  of  Elizabethan  Literature.
viii
Arden  of  Feversham  preface
The  latest  German  editors,  Warnke  and  Proescholt  (1888),  'are of  opinion  that  Shakespeare  had  nothing  to  do  with  Arden  of Faverskam.^
The  Question  of  Shakespeare's  Authorship.  The  only reason  for  ascribing  the  play  to  Shakespeare  is  its  merit.  It seems  incredible  that  a  drama  so  mature  in  its  art  should  have been  written  in  1592  by  a  writer  otherwise  unknown  to  us.  In three  directions  the  art  of  the  writer  is  mature.  First,  the character  of  the  base  coward  Mosbie,  and  of  the  *  bourgeois Clytemnestra,'  Alice  Arden,  are  drawn  with  an  insight,  delicacy, and  sustained  power  new  to  English  literature  in  1592,  and  not excelled  till  Shakespeare  excelled  them.  The  picture  of  Arden, as  a  man  fascinated  and  bewitched  by  his  wife  and  by  his  fate, might  match  that  of  Mosbie  and  Alice  if  the  artist  had  not blurred  his  conception  by  the  introduction  of  the  jarring  motives of  avarice  and  sacrilege.  But  the  poet's  aim  is  clear  ;  it  is  his own,  and  it  almost  succeeds.  Second,  the  picturesque  ferocity and  grim  humour  of  Black  Will  and  Shakebag  are  described with  a  firmness  and  ease  and  restraint  of  style  which  critics have  not  sufficiently  noted.  I  can  compare  it  only  with  the Jack  Cade  scenes  of  the  Contention  (and  2  Henry  VI. ).  The prose  of  our  poet  is  excellent.  His  humour  has  a  clearly defined  character  and  style  of  its  own.  The  character  of Michael,  so  admired  by  Mr.  Swinburne,  is  as  subtle  and well-sustained  as  Mosbie's  or  Alice  Arden's,  and  it  exhibits our  poet's  special  humorous  gift.  This  gift,  excellent  as  it is,  seems  to  me  very  definitely  not  Shakespearean.  But thirdly,  the  terrifying  use  of  signs  and  omens  and  of  an  almost ix
PREFACE  Arden  of  Feversham
Shakespearean  irony — e.g.  Arden's  words,  '  I  am  almost  stifled with  this  fog  ! ' — combine  to  produce  as  the  play  proceeds  an impressive  sense  of  '  the  slow  unerring  tread  of  assassination, balked  but  persevering,  marching  like  a  fate  to  its  accomplish- ment.' But  the  special  excellencies  of  the  play  are  all  against Shakespeare  having  written  it  by  1592.  As  Mr.  Bullen  insists, the  weak  point  in  Mr.  Swinburne's  criticism  is  the  phrase •  a  young  man's  work. '  This  play  is  not  '  a  young  man's  work. ' The  copiousness  of  the  young  man  Shakespeare's  work  is  the exact  contrary  of  the  deliberate  anxious  effort  which  marks  the style  of  Arden  of  Faversham  except  in  the  prose  scenes.  In none  of  Shakespeare's  plays  can  it  be  perceived  that  the  poet has  taken  such  pains  as  the  poet  of  Arden  takes.  Unless Shakespeare  wrote  this  play  as  soon  as  he  reached  London, and  then  for  a  year  or  two  wrote  nothing  else,  it  is  impossible to  fit  it  into  his  work.  And  if  he  wrote  the  play  as  soon as  he  reached  London  and  then  took  up  the  studies  which resulted  in  Venus  and  Adonis  and  Lttcrece,  would  he  have written  Love's  Labour^ s  Lost  and  Comedy  of  Errors  on  his way  back  to  work  like  Arden'i  If  Shakespeare  wrote  Arden it  is  the  most  interesting  fact  in  his  literary  development. To  suggest  that  Shakespeare  revised  the  play  is  to  shirk the  question.  Its  excellence  is  in  its  warp  and  woof,  not  in  its ornaments.
Literature.  Mr.  Bullen's  Lntrodtidion  is  the  best  mono- graph on  the  play.  Warnke  and  Proescholt's  Introduction should  be  consulted,  but  lacks  the  distinction  of  style  and  the critical  insight  of  Mr.  Bullen's  essay.  Excellent  analyses  and criticisms  of  the  play  are  in  Charles  Knight's  Doubtful  Plays
Arden  of  Feversham
PREFACE
(*  Pictorial  Shakespere ') ;  J.  A.  Symonds'  Shakspere's  Prede- cessors *y  Alfred  Mezieres'  Prid^cesseurs  et  Contemporains  de Shakspeare.  Mr.  Fleay  in  his  Biographical  Chronicle  of  the English  Drama  (1891)  has  suggested  Kyd  as  the  author  of Arden,
XI
ARDEN  OF  FEVERSHAM
DRAMATIS    PERSONS
Thomas  Arden,  Gentleman,  of  Feversham Franklin,  his  Friend
MOSBIE
Clarke,  a  Painter
Adam  Fowle,  Landlord  of  the  Flo\ver-de-Luce
Bkadshaw,  a  Goldsmith
Michael,  Arden's  Servant
Greene
Richard  Reede,  a  Sailor
J^^^^^^^^  I  Murderers Shakebag     J
A  Prentice
A  Ferryman
Lord  Cheinv,  and  his  Men
Mayor  of  Feversham,  and  Watch
Alice,  Arden's  Wife Susan,  Mosbie's  Sister
ARDEN  OF   FEVERSHAM

ACT I

A  Room  in  Ardeti^s  House. Enter  Arden  and  Franklin.
Franklin.  Arden,  cheer  up  thy  spirits,  and  droop  no more ! My  gracious  Lord,  the  Duke  of  Somerset, Hath  freely  given  to  thee  and  to  thy  heirs. By  letters  patents  from  his  Majesty, All  the  lands  of  the  Abbey  of  Feversham. Here  are  the  deeds,  \^He  hands  them.
Sealed  and   subscribed   with    his    name    and  the
king's  : Read  them,  and  leave  this  melancholy  mood.
Arden.  Franklin,  thy  love  prolongs  my  weary  life  ;
And  but  for  thee  how  odious  were  this  life,  lo
That  shows  me  nothing  but  torments  my  soul, And  those  foul  objects  that  offend  mine  eyes  ! Which  makes  me  wish  that  for  this  veil  of  heaven The  earth  hung  over  my  head  and  covered  me.
ACT  I.  Arden  of  Feversham
Love-letters  pass  'twixt  Mosbie  and  my  wife, And  they  have  privy  meetings  in  the  town  : Nay,  on  his  finger  did  I  spy  the  ring Which  at  our  marriage-day  the  priest  put  on. Can  any  grief  be  half  so  great  as  this  ?
Franklin.    Comfort  thyself,   sweet    friend ;    it    is    not strange  20
That  women  will  be  false  and  wavering.
Arden,  Ay,  but  to  dote  on  such  a  one  as  he Is  monstrous,  Franklin,  and  intolerable.
Fra7iklin.  Why,  what  is  he  ?
Arden.  A  botcher,  and  no  better  at  the  first ;
Who,  by  base  brokage  getting  some  small  stock,
Crept  into  service  of  a  nobleman.
And  by  his  servile  flattery  and  fawning
Is  now  become  the  steward  of  his  house,
And  bravely  jets  it  in  his  silken  gown.  30
Franklin.    No    nobleman    will    countenance     such     a peasant.
Arden.  Yes,  the  Lord  Clifford,  he  that  loves  not  me. But  through  his  favour  let  him  not  grow  proud ; For  were  he  by  the  Lord  Protector  backed. He  should  not  make  me  to  be  pointed  at. I  am  by  birth  a  gentleman  of  blood, And  that  injurious  ribald,  that  attempts To  violate  my  dear  wife's  chastity (For  dear  I  hold  her  love,  as  dear  as  heaven) Shall  on  the  bed  which  he  thinks  to  defile  40
2
Arden  of  Feversham  act  i.
See  his  dissevered  joints  and  sinews  torn, Whilst  on  the  planchers  pants  his  weary  body, Smeared  in  the  channels  of  his  lustful  blood.
Franklin.  Be  patient,  gentle  friend,  and  learn  of  me To  ease  thy  grief  and  save  her  chastity  : Intreat  her  fair  ;  sweet  words  are  fittest  engines To  race  the  flint  walls  of  a  v/oman's  breast. In  any  case  be  not  too  jealous. Nor  make  no  question  of  her  love  to  thee  ; But,  as  securely,  presently  take  horse,  50
And  lie  with  me  at  London  all  this  term  ; For  women,  when  they  may,  will  not, But,  being  kept  back,  straight  grow  outrageous.
Arden.  Though  this  abhors  from  reason,  yet  I  '11  try  it, And  call  her  forth  and  presently  take  leave. How  !  Alice !
Here  enters  Alice.
Alice.  Husband,  what  mean  you  to  get  up  so  early  ? Summer-nights  are  short,  and  yet  you  rise  ere  day. Had  I  been  wake,  you  had  not  risen  so  soon.
Arden.    Sweet  love,  thou  knowest  that  we  two.  Ovid- like, 60 Have  often  chid  the  morning  when  it  'gan  to  peep. And  often  wished  that  dark  night's  purblind  steeds Would  pull  her  by  the  purple  mantle  back, And  cast  her  in  the  ocean  to  her  love. B                                  3

ACT  I

But  this   night,  sweet  Alice,  thou  hast  killed  my heart  :
I  heard  thee  call  on  Mosbie  in  thy  sleep. Alice.  'Tis  like  I  was  asleep  when  I  named  him,
For  being  awake  he  comes  not  in  my  thoughts. Ardeji.  Ay,  but  you  started  up  and  suddenly.
Instead  of  him,  caught  me  about  the  neck.  70
Alice.  Instead  of  him?  why,  who  was  there  but  you?
And  where  but  one  is,  how  can  I  mistake  ? Franklin.  Arden,  leave  to  urge  her  over-far. Arden.  Nay,  love,  there  is  no  credit  in  a  dream  ;
Let  it  suffice  I  know  thou  lovest  me  well. Alice.  Now  I  remember  whereupon  it  came  :
Had  we  no  talk  of  Mosbie  yesternight  ? Franklin.  Mistress  Alice,  I  heard  you  name  him  once
or  twice. Alice.  And  thereof  came  it,  and   therefore  blame  not
me. Arden.  I  know  it  did,  and  therefore  let  it  pass.  80
I  must  to  London,  sweet  Alice,  presently. Alice.  But  tell  me,  do  you  mean  to  stay  there  long  ? Arden.  No  longer  there  till  my  affairs  be  done. Franklin.  He  will  not  stay  above  a  month  at  most. Alice.  A  month  ?  ay  me  !     Sweet  Arden,  come  again
Within  a  day  or  two,  or  else  I  die. Ardc7i.   I  cannot  long  b^^  from  thee,  gentle  Alice.
Whilst  Michael  fetch  our  horses  from  the  field.
Franklin  and  I  will  down  unto  the  quay  ; 4
Arden  of  Feversham  act  i.
For  I  have  certain  goods  there  to  unload.  90
Meanwhile  prepare  our  breakfast,  gentle  Alice  ; For  yet  ere  noon  we  '11  take  horse  and  away.
\_Exeunt  Arden  and  Franklin. Alice.  Ere  noon  he  means  to  take  horse  and  away  ! Sweet  news  is  this.     O  that  some  airy  spirit Would  in  the  shape  and  likeness  of  a  horse Gallop  with  Arden  'cross  the  Ocean, And  throw  him  from  his  back  into  the  waves  ! Sweet  Mosbie  is  the  man  that  hath  my  heart : And  he  usurps  it,  having  nought  but  this. That  I  am  tied  to  him  by  marriage.  100
Love  is  a  God,  and  marriage  is  but  words  ; And  therefore  Mosbie's  title  is  the  best. Tush  !  whether  it  be  or  no,  he  shall  be  mine, In  spite  of  him,  of  Hymen,  and  of  rites.
Here  enters  Adam  of  the  Flower-de-luce.
And  here  comes  Adam  of  the  Flower-de-luce  ;
I  hope  he  brings  me  tidings  of  my  love.
— How  now,  Adam,  what  is  the  news  with  you  ?
Be  not  afraid  ;  my  husband  is  now  from  home, Adam.  He  whom  you  wot  of,  Mosbie,  Mistress  Alice,
Is  come  to  town,  and  sends  you  word  by  me        no
In  any  case  you  may  not  visit  him. Alice.  Not  visit  him? Adam.  No,  nor  take  no  knowledge  of  his  being  here.
ACT  I.  Arden  of  Feversham
Alice.  But  tell  me,  is  he  angry  or  displeased  ?
Adam.  It  should  seem  so,  for  he  is  Avondrous  sad.
Alice.  Were  he  as  mad  as  raving  Hercules,
I  '11  see  him,  I  ;  and  were  thy  house  of  force, These  hands  of  mine  should  race  it  to  the  ground, Unless  that  thou  wouldst  bring  me  to  my  love.
Adam.  Nay,  and  you  be  so  impatient,  I  '11  be  gone.    120
Alice.  Stay,  Adam,   stay  ;    thou   wert  wont   to   be  my friend. Ask  Mosbie  how  I  have  incurred  his  wrath  ; Bear  him  from  me  these  pair  of  silver  dice, With  which  we  played  for  kisses  many  a  time, And  when  I  lost,  I  won,  and  so  did  he  ; — Such  winning  and  such  losing  Jove  send  me  ! And  bid  him,  if  his  love  do  not  decline. To  come  this  morning  but  along  my  door, And  as  a  stranger  but  salute  me  there  : This  may  he  do  without  suspect  or  fear.  130
Adam.  I  '11  tell  him  what  you  say,  and  so  farewell.
\Exit  Adam.
Alice.  Do,  and  one  day  I  '11  make  amends  for  all. — I  know  he  loves  me  well,  but  dares  not  come. Because  my  husband  is  so  jealous. And  these  my  narrow-prying  neighbours  blab, Hinder  our  meetings  when  we  would  confer. But,  if  I  live,  that  block  shall  be  removed. And,  Mosbie,  thou  that  comes  to  me  by  stealth, Shalt  neither  fear  the  biting  speech  of  men. 6
Arden  of  Feversham  act  i.
Nor  Arden's  looks  ;  as  surely  shall  he  die  140
As  I  abhor  him  and  love  only  thee.
Here  enters  Michael.
How  now,  Michael,  whither  are  you  going  ?
Michael.  To  fetch  my  master's  nag. I  hope  you'll  think  on  me.
Alice.  Ay  ;  but,  Michael,  see  you  keep  your  oath, And  be  as  secret  as  you  are  resolute.
Michael.  I  '11  see  he  shall  not  live  above  a  week.
Alice.  On  that  condition,  Michael,  here's  my  hand  : None  shall  have  Mosbie's  sister  but  thyself.
Michael.  I  understand  the  painter  here  hard  by  150
Hath  made  report  that  he  and  Sue  is  sure.
Alice.  There  's  no  such  matter,  Michael ;  beHeve  it  not.
Michael.   But    he    hath    sent   a   dagger  sticking    in  a heart. With  a  verse  or  two  stolen  from  a  painted  cloth, The  which  I  hear  the  wench  keeps  in  her  chest. Well,  let  her  keep  it  !  I  shall  find  a  fellow That  can  both  write  and  read  and  make  rhyme  too. And  if  I  do — well,  I  say  no  more  : I  '11  send  from  London  such  a  taunting  letter As  she  shall  eat  the  heart  he  sent  with  salt  160
And  fling  the  dagger  at  the  painter's  head.
Alice.  What  needs  all  this  ?     I  say  that  Susan 's  thine.
Michael.  Why,  then  1  say  that  I  will  kill  my  master, Or  anything  that  you  will  have  me  do. 7
V
ACT  I.  Arden  of  Feversham
Alice.  But,  Michael,  see  you  do  it  cunningly.
Michael.  Why,  say  I  should  be  took,  I  '11  ne'er  confess That   you   know   anything  ;    and   Susan,   being  a
maid. May  beg  me  from  the  gallows  of  the  sheriff.
Alice.  Trust  not  to  that,  Michael.
Michael.  You  cannot  tell  me,  I  have  seen  it,  I.  170
But,  mistress,  tell  her,  whether  I  live  or  die, I'll   make  her  more  worth   than   twenty   painters
can  ; For  I  will  rid  mine  elder  brother  away, And  then  the  farm  of  Bolton  is  mine  own. Who  would  not  venture  upon  house  and  land, When  he  may  have  it  for  a  right  down  blow  ?
Here  enters  Mosbie.
Alice.  Yonder  comes  Mosbie.     Michael,  get  tnee  gone,
And  let  not  him  nor  any  know  thy  drifts.
\_Exit  Michael.
Mosbie,  my  love  ! Mosbie.  Away,  I  say,  and  talk  not  to  me  now.  180
Alice.  A  word  or  two,  sweet  heart,  and  then  I  will.
'Tis  yet  but  early  days,  thou  needst  not  fear. Mosbie.  Where  is  your  husband  ? Alice.  'Tis  now  high  water,  and  he  is  at  the  quay. Mosbie.  There  let  him  be  ;  henceforward  know  me  not. Alice.  Is  this  the  end  of  all  thy  solemn  oaths  ?
Is  this  the  fruit  thy  reconcilement  buds  ? 8
Arden  of  Feversham  act  i.
Have  I  for  this  given  thee  so  many  favours,
Incurred  my  husband's  hate,  and,  out  alas  I
Made  shipwreck  of  mine  honour  for  thy  sake  ?    190
And  dost  thou  say  *  henceforward  know  me  not '  ?
Remember,  when  I  lock'd  thee  in  my  closet,
What  were  thy  words  and  mine  ;  did  we  not  both
Decree  to  murder  Arden  in  the  night  ?
The  heavens  can  witness,  and  the  world  can  tell,
Before  I  saw  that  falsehood  look  of  thine,
'Fore  I  was  tangled  with  thy  'ticing  speech,
Arden  to  me  was  dearer  than  my  soul, —
And  shall  be  still  :  base  peasant,  get  thee  gone,
And  boast  not  of  thy  conquest  over  me,  200
Gotten  by  witchcraft  and  mere  sorcery  !
For  what  hast  thou  to  countenance  my  love,
Being  descended  of  a  noble  house,
And  matched  already  with  a  gentleman
Whose  servant  thou  may'st  be  !— and  so  farewell.
Mosbie.  Ungentle  and  unkind  Alice,  now  I  see That  which  I  ever  feared,  and  find  too  true  : A  woman's  love  is  as  the  lightning-flame. Which  even  in  bursting  forth  consumes  itself. To  try  thy  constancy  have  I  been  strange  ;  210
Would  I  had  never  tried,  but  lived  in  hope  !
Alice.    What  need'st  thou  try    me  whom    thou   ne'er found  false  ?
Mosbie.  Yet  pardon  me,  for  love  is  jealous.
Alice.  So  lists  the  sailor  to  the  mermaid's  song, 9
ACT  I.  Arden  of  Feversham
So  looks  the  traveller  to  the  basilisk  :
I  am  content  for  to  be  reconciled,
And  that,  I  know,  will  be  mine  overthrow.
Mosbie.  Thine  overthrow  ?  first  let  the  world  dissolve.
Alice.  Nay,  Mosbie,  let  me  still  enjoy  thy  love,
And  happen  what  will,  I  am  resolute.  220
My  saving  husband  hoards  up  bags  of  gold To  make  our  children  rich,  and  now  is  he Gone  to  unload  the  goods  that  shall  be  thine, And  he  and  Franklin  will  to  London  straight.
Mosbie.  To  London,  Alice  ?  if  thou  'It  be  ruled  by  rne, We  '11  make  him  sure  enough  for  coming  there.
Alice.  Ah,  would  we  could  !
Mosbie.  I  happened  on  a  painter  yesternight, The  only  cunning  man  of  Christendom  ; For  he  can  temper  poison  with  his  oil,  230
That  whoso  looks  upon  the  work  he  draws Shall,  with  the  beams  that  issue  from  his  sight, Suck  venom  to  his  breast  and  slay  himself. Sweet  Alice,  he  shall  draw  thy  counterfeit, That  Arden  may,  by  gazing  on  it,  perish.
Alice.  Ay,  but  Mosbie,  that  is  dangerous, For  thou,  or  I,  or  any  other  else. Coming  into  the  chamber  where  it  hangs,  may  die.
Mosbie.  Ay,  but  we  '11  have  it  covered  with  a  cloth
And  hung  up  in  the  study  for  himself.  240
Alice.  It  may  not  be,  for  when  the  picture's  drawn, Arden,  I  know,  will  come  and  show  it  me 10
Arden  of  Feversham  act  i.
Mosbie.  Fear  not ;  we  '11  have  that  shall  serve  the  turn.
This  is  the  painter's  house  ;  I  '11  call  him  forth. Alice.  But  Mosbie,  I  '11  have  no  such  picture,  I. Mosbie.  I  pray  thee  leave  it  to  my  discretion.
How!  Clarke!
Here  enters  Clarke.
Oh,  you   are  an  honest  man  of  your  word  !   you served  me  well.
CLirke.  Why,  sir,  I  '11  do  it  for  you  at  any  time,
Provided,  as  you  have  given  your  word,  250
I  may  have  Susan  Mosbie  to  my  wife.
For,  as  sharp-witted  poets,  whose  sweet  verse
Make  heavenly  gods  break  off  their  nectar  draughts
And  lay  their  ears  down  to  the  lowly  earth.
Use  humble  promise  to  their  sacred  Muse,
So  we  that  are  the  poets'  favourites
Must  have  a  love  :  ay,  Love  is  the  painter's  muse,
That  makes  him  frame  a  speaking  countenance,
A  weeping  eye  that  witnesses  heart's  grief.
Then  tell  me,  Master  Mosbie,  shall  I  have  her  ?  260
Alice.  'Tis  pity  but  he  should  ;  he  '11  use  her  well.
Mosbie.    Clarke,  here's  my  hand:    my  sister  shall  be thine.
Clarke.  Then,  brother,  to  requite  this  courtesy, You  shall  command  my  life,  my  skill,  and  all.
Alice.  Ah,  that  thou  couldst  be  secret.
Mosbie.  Fear  him  not ;  leave  ;  I  have  talked  sufficient II
ACT  I.  Arden  of  Feversham
Clarke.  You  know  not  me  that  ask  such  questions. Let  it  suffice  I  know  you  love  him  well, And  fain  would  have  your  husband  made  away  : Wherein,  trust  me,  you  show  a  noble  mind,  270
That  rather  than  you  '11  live  with  him  you  hate, You  '11  venture  life,  and  die  with  him  you  love. The  like  will  I  do  for  my  Susan's  sake.
Alice.  Yet  nothing  could  inforce  me  to  the  deed But  Mosbie's  love.     Might  I  without  control Enjoy  thee  still,  then  Arden  should  not  die  : But  seeing  I  cannot,  therefore  let  him  die.
Mosbie.    Enough,  sweet  Alice ;   thy  kind  words  makes me  melt. Your  trick  of  poisoned  pictures  we  dislike; Some  other  poison  would  do  better  far.  280
Alice.  Ay,  such  as  might  be  put  into  his  broth, And  yet  in  taste  not  to  be  found  at  all.
Clarke.  I  know  your  mind,  and  here  I  have  it  for  you. Put  but  a  dram  of  this  into  his  drink, Or  any  kind  of  broth  that  he  shall  eat, And  he  shall  die  within  an  hour  after.
Alice.  As  I  am  a  gentlewoman,  Clarke,  next  day Thou  and  Susan  shall  be  married.
Mosbie.  And  I  '11  make  her  dowry  more  than  I  '11  talk  of, Clarke.
Clarke.     Yonder 's    your    husband.      Mosbie,    I  '11     be gone.  290
12
Arden  of  Feversham  act  i.
Here  enters  Arden  and  Franklin.
Alice.  In  good  time  see  where  my  husband  comes.
Master  Mosbie,  ask  him  the  question  yourself.
{Exit  Clarke. Mosbie.  Master  Arden,  being  at  London  yesternight,
The  Abbey  lands,  whereof  you  are  now  possessed,
Were  offered  me  on  some  occasion
By  Greene,  one  of  Sir  Antony  Ager's  men  :
I  pray  you,  sir,  tell  me,  are  not  the  lands  yours  ?
Hath  any  other  interest  herein  ? Arden.  Mosbie,  that  question  we'll  decide  anon.
Alice,  make  ready  my  breakfast,  I  must  hence.    300
\_Exit  Alice.
As  for  the  lands,  Mosbie,  they  are  mine
By  letters  patents  from  his  Majesty.
But  I  must  have  a  mandate  for  my  wife  ;
They  say  you  seek  to  rob  me  of  her  love  :
Villain,  what  makes  thou  in  her  company  ?
She 's  no  companion  for  so  base  a  groom. Mosbie.  Arden,  I  thought  not  on  her,  I  came  to  thee ;
But  rather  than  I  pocket  up  this  wrong  
Fra7iklin.  What  will  you  do,  sir  ?
Mosbie.  Revenge  it  on  the  proudest  of  you  both.         310 {Then  Arden  draws  forth  Mosbie' s  sword. Arden.  So,  sirrah  ;  you  may  not  wear  a  sword,
The  statute  makes  against  artificers  ;
I  warrant  that  I  do.     Now  use  your  bodkin, 13
ACT  I.  Arden  of  Feversham
Your  Spanish  needle,  and  your  pressing  iron, For  this  shall  go  with  me  ;  and  mark  my  words, You  goodman  botcher,  'tis  to  you  I  speak  : The  next  time  that  I  take  thee  near  my  house, Instead  of  legs  I  '11  make  thee  crawl  on  stumps.
Mosbie.  Ah,  Master  Arden,  you  have  injured  me  :
I  do  appeal  to  God  and  to  the  world.  320
Fianklin.    Why,  canst  thou  deny  thou  wert  a  botcher once?
Mosbie.  Measure  me  what  I  am,  not  what  I  was.
Arden.  Why,  what  art  thou  now  but  a  velvet  drudge, A  cheating  steward,  and  base-minded  peasant  1
Mosbie.  Arden,  now  thou  hast  belched  and  vomited The  rancorous  venom  of  thy  mis-swoll'n  heart, Hear  me  but  speak  :  as  I  intend  to  live With  God  and  his  elected  saints  in  heaven, I  never  meant  more  to  solicit  her  ; And  that  she  knows,  and  all  the  world  shall  see.  330 I  loved  her  once  ; — sweet  Arden,  pardon  me, I  could  not  choose,  her  beauty  fired  my  heart  ! But  time  hath  quenched  these  over-raging  coals  ; And,  Arden,  though  I  now  frequent  thy  house, 'Tis  for  my  sister's  sake,  her  waiting-maid. And  not  for  hers.     Mayest  thou  enjoy  her  long: Hell-fire  and  wrathful  vengeance  light  on  me, If  I  dishonour  her  or  injure  thee.
Arden.  Mosbie,  with  these  thy  protestations
The  deadly  hatred  of  my  heart's  appeased,  340
14
Arden  of  Feversham  act  l
And  thou  and  I  '11  be  friends,  if  this  prove  true. As  for  the  base  terms  I  gave  thee  late, Forget  them,  Mosbie  :  I  had  cause  to  speak, When  all  the  knights  and  gentlemen  of  Kent Make  common  table-talk  of  her  and  thee.
Mosbie.  Who  lives  that  is  not  touched  with  slanderous tongues  t
Franklin.  Then,  Mosbie,  to  eschew  the  speech  of  men, Upon  whose  general  bruit  all  honour  hangs, Forbear  his  house.
Arden.  Forbear  it  !  nay,  rather  frequent  it  more  :       350 The  world  shall  see  that  I  distrust  her  not. To  warn  him  on  the  sudden  from  my  house Were  to  confirm  the  rumour  that  is  grown.
Mosbie.  By  my  faith,  sir,  you  say  true.
And  therefore  will  I  sojourn  here  a  while.
Until  our  enemies  have  talked  their  fill ;
And  then,  I  hope,  they  '11  cease,  and  at  last  confess
How  causeless  they  have  injured  her  and  me.
Arden.  And  I  will  lie  at  London  all  this  term
To  let  them  see  how  light  I  weigh  their  words.    360
Here  enters  Alice.
Alice.  Husband,  sit  down  ;  your  breakfast  will  be  cold. Arden.  Come,  Master  Mosbie,  will  you  sit  with  us  ? Mosbie.  I  cannot  eat,  but  I  '11  sit  for  company. Arden.  Sirrah  Tvlichael,  see  our  horse  be  ready. Alice.  Husband,  why  pause  ye  ?  why  eat  you  not  ? 15
ACT  I.  Arden  of  Feversham
Arden.  I  am  not  well ;  there  's  something  in  this  broth That  is  not  wholesome  :  didst  thou  make  it,  Alice  ?
Alice.  I  did,  and  that's  the  cause  it  likes  not  you.
[  Then  she  throws  down  the  broth  on  the  ground. There 's  nothing  that  I  do  can  please  your  taste  ; You  were    best    to    say   I   would    have    poisoned you.  370
I  cannot  speak  or  cast  aside  my  eye, But  he  imagines  I  have  stepped  awry. Here's  he  that  you  cast  in  my  teeth  so  oft : Now  will  I  be  convinced  or  purge  myself. I  charge  thee  speak  to  this  mistrustful  man, Thou  that  wouldst  see  me  hang,  thou,  Mosbie,  thou: What  favour  hast  thou  had  more  than  a  kiss At  coming  or  departing  from  the  town  ?
Mosbie.    You   wrong    yourself   and    me  to   cast   these doubts  : Your  loving  husband  is  not  jealous.  380
Arden.  Why,  gentle  Mistress  Alice,  cannot  I  be  ill But  you'll  accuse  yourself? Franklin,  thou  hast  a  box  of  mithridate  ; I  '11  take  a  little  to  prevent  the  worst.
Franklin.  Do  so,  and  let  us  presently  take  horse  ; My  life  for  yours,  ye  shall  do  well  enough.
Alice.  Give  me  a  spoon,  I  '11  eat  of  it  myself; Would  it  were  full  of  poison  to  the  brim, Then  should  my  cares  and  troubles  have  an  end. Was  ever  silly  woman  so  tormented  t  390
16
Arden  of  Feversham  act  i.
Arden.  Be  patient,  sweet  love  ;  I  mistrust  not  thee. Alice.  God  will  revenge  it,  Arden,  if  thou  dost;
For  never  woman  loved  her  husband  better
Than  I  do  thee. Arden.  I  know  it,  sweet  Alice  ;  cease  to  complain,
Lest  that  in  tears  I  answer  thee  again, Frafiklin.  Come,  leave  this  dallying,  and  let  us  away. Alice.  Forbear  to  wound  me  with  that  bitter  word ;
Arden  shall  go  to  London  in  my  arms. Arden.  Loth  am  I  to  depart,  yet  I  must  go.  400
Alice.    Wilt    thou    to     London,  then,   and    leave    me here  ?
Ah,  if  thou  love  me,  gentle  Arden,  stay.
Yet,  if  thy  business  be  of  great  import
Go,  if  thou  wilt,  I  '11  bear  it  as  I  may  ;
But  write  from  London  to  me  every  week,
Nay,  every  day,  and  stay  no  longer  there
Than  thou  must  needs,  lest  that  I  die  for  sorrow. Ardcft.  I  '11  write  unto  thee  every  other  tide.
And  so  farewell,  sweet  Alice,  till  we  meet  next. Alice:.  Farewell,  husband,  seeing  you'll  have  it  so  ;    410 ^  And,  Master  Franklin,  seeing  you  take  him  hence,
In  hope   you  '11  hasten   him   home,    I  '11   give  you this.
\^And  then  she  kisseth  him. Franklin.  And  if  he  stay,  the  fault  shall  not  be  mine.
Mosbie,  farewell,  and  see  you  keep  your  oath. Mosbie.   I  hope  he  is  not  jealous  of  me  now. 17
ACT  I.  Arden  of  Feversham
Arden.  No,  Mosbie,  no  ;  hereafter  think  of  me As  of  your  dearest  friend,  and  so  farewell.
\Exeunt  Arden ^  Franklijt,  and  Michael.
Alice.  I  am  glad  he  is  gone  ;  he  was  about  to  stay, But  did  you  mark  me  then  how  I  brake  off?
Mosbie.  Ay,  Alice,  and  it  was  cunningly  performed.  420 But  what  a  villain  is  that  painter  Clarke  !
Alice.  Was  it  not  a  goodly  poison  that  he  gave  ? Why,  he's  as  well  now  as  he  was  before. It  should  have  been  some  fine  confection That  might  have  given  the  broth  some  dainty  taste  : This  powder  was  too  gross  and  populous.
Mosbie.  But  had  he  eaten  but  three  spoonfuls  more, Then  had  he  died  and  our  love  continued.
Alice.  Why,  so  it  shall,  Mosbie,  albeit  he  live.
Mosbie.  It  is  unpossible,  for  I  have  sworn  430
Never  hereafter  to  solicit  thee, Or,  whilst  he  lives,  once  more  importune  thee.
Alice.  Thou  shalt  not  need,  I  will  importune  thee.
What?  shall  an  oath  make  thee  forsake  my  love? As  if  I  have  not  sworn  as  much  myself And  given  my  hand  unto  him  in  the  church  ! Tush,  Mosbie  ;  oaths  are  words,  and  words  is  wind, And  wind  is  mutable  :  then,  I  conclude, 'Tis  childishness  to  stand  upon  an  oath.
Mosbie.    Well   proved,    Mistress    Alice ;     yet   by   your leave  440
I  'II  keep  mine  unbroken  whilst  he  lives. 18
Arden  of  Feversham  act  i.
Alice.  Ay,  do,  and  spare  not,  his  time  is  but  short ; For  if  thou  beest  as  resolute  as  I, We  '11  have  him  murdered  as  he  walks  the  streets. In  London  many  alehouse  ruffians  keep, Which,  as  I  hear,  will  murder  men  for  gold. They  shall  be  soundly  fee'd  to  pay  him  home.
Here  enters  Gree?te.
Mosbie.  AHce,  what's  he  that  comes  yonder?  knowest thou  him  ?
AHce.  Mosbie,  be  gone  :  I  hope  'tis  one  that  comes
To  put  in  practice  our  intended  drifts.  450
{Exit  Mosbie
Greene,  Mistress  Arden,  you  are  well  met.
I  am  sorry  that  your  husband  is  from  home, Whenas  my  purposed  journey  was  to  him  : Yet  all  my  labour  is  not  spent  in  vain, For  I  suppose  that  you  can  full  discourse And  flat  resolve  me  of  the  thing  I  seek.
Alice.  What  is  it,  Master  Greene.^     If  that  I  may Or  can  with  safety,  I  will  answer  you.
Greene.  I  heard  your  husband  hath  the  grant  of  late, Confirmed  by  letters  patents  from  the  king,         460 Of  all  the  lands  of  the  Abbey  of  Feversham, Generally  intitled,  so  that  all  former  grants Are  cut  off ;  whereof  I  myself  had  one  ; But  now  my  interest  by  that  is  void. This  is  all,  Mistress  Arden  ;  is  it  true  or  no
c  19
ACT  I.  Arden  of  Feversham
Alice.  True,  Master  Greene  ;  the  lands  are  his  in  state, And  whatsoever  leases  were  before Are  void  for  term  of  Master  Arden's  life  ; He  hath  the  grant  under  the  Chancery  seal.
Greene.  Pardon  me,  Mistress  Arden,  I  must  speak,    470 For  I  am  touched.     Your  husband  doth  me  wrong To  wring  me  from  the  little  land  I  have. My  living  is  my  life,  and  only  that Resteth  remainder  of  my  portion. Desire  of  wealth  is  endless  in  his  mind, And  he  is  greedy-gaping  still  for  gain  ; Nor  cares  he  though  young  gentlemen  do  beg. So  he  may  scrape  and  hoard  up  in  his  pouch. But,  seeing  he  hath  ta'en  my  lands,  I  '11  value  life As  careless  as  he  is  careful  for  to  get :  480
And  tell  him  this  from  me,  I  '11  be  revenged, And  so  as  he  shall  wish  the  Abbey  lands Had  rested  still  within  their  former  state.
Alice.  Alas,  poor  gentleman,  I  pity  you,
And  woe  is  me  that  any  man  should  want  ! God  knows  'tis  not  my  fault ;  but  wonder  not Though  he  be  hard  to  others,  when  to  me, — Ah,  Master  Greene,  God  knows  how  I  am  used.
Greene.  Why,  Mistress  Arden,  can  the  crabbed  churl Use  you  unkindly  ?  respects  he  not  your  birth,    490 Your  honourable  friends,  nor  what  you  brought  ? Why,  all   Kent  knows  your   parentage  and  what you  are.
20
Arden  of  Feversham  act  i.
Alice.  Ah,  Master  Greene,  be  it  spoken  in  secret  here, I  never  live  good  day  with  him  alone  : When  he 's  at  home,  then  have  I  froward  looks, Hard  words  and  blows  to  mend  the  match  withal  j And  though  I  might  content  as  good  a  man, Yet  doth  he  keep  in  every  corner  trulls  ; And  when  he's  weary  with  his  trugs  at  home. Then    rides    he    straight   to    London ;    there,   for- sooth, 500 He  revels  it  among  such  filthy  ones As  counsels  him  to  make  away  his  wife. Thus  live  I  daily  in  continual  fear, In  sorrow  ;  so  despairing  of  redress As  every  day  I  wish  with  hearty  prayer That  he  or  I  were  taken  forth  the  world.
Greene.  Now  trust  me.  Mistress  Alice,  it  grieveth  me So  fair  a  creature  should  be  so  abused. Why,   who   would    have  thought   the  civil  sir  so
sullen  ? He    looks    so    smoothly.      Now,    fie     upon     him, churl!  510
And  if  he  live  a  day,  he  lives  too  long. But  frolic,  woman  !  I  shall  be  the  man Shall  set  you  free  from  all  this  discontent ; And  if  the  churl  deny  my  interest And  will  not  yield  my  lease  into  my  hand, I  'II  pay  him  home,  whatever  hap  to  me.
Alice.  But  speak  you  as  you  think  ? 21
ACT  I.  Arden  of  Feversham
Greene.  Ay,  God 's  my  witness,  I  mean  plain  dealing, For  I  had  rather  die  than  lose  my  land.
Alice.  Then,  Master  Greene,  be  counselled  by  me  :    520 Indanger  not  yourself  for  such  a  churl, But  hire  some  cutter  for  to  cut  him  short, And  here 's  ten  pound  to  wager  them  withal ; When  he  is  dead,  you  shall  have  twenty  more. And  the  lands  whereof  my  husband  is  possess'd Shall  be  intitled  as  they  were  before.
Greene.  Will  you  keep  promise  with  me  ?
Alice.  Or  count  me  false  and  perjured  whilst  I  live.
Greene.    Then  here 's   my  hand,  I  '11  have  him  so  dis- patched. I  '11  up  to  London  straight,  I  '11  thither  post,  530
And  never  rest  till  I  have  compassed  it. Till  then  farewell.
Alice.  Good  fortune  follow  all  your  forward  thoughts.
S^Exit  Greene. And  whosoever  doth  attempt  the  deed, A  happy  hand  I  wish,  and  so  farewell. — All  this  goes  well :  Mosbie,  I  long  for  thee To  let  thee  know  all  that  I  have  contrived.
Here  enters  Mosbie  and  Clarke,
Mosbie.  How,  now,  Alice,  what's  the  news? Alice.  Such  as  will  content  thee  well,  sweetheart. Mosbie.  Well,  let  them  pass  a  while,  and  tell  me,  Alice, 22
Arden  of  Feversham  act  i.
How  have  you  dealt  and  tempered  with  my  sister  ? What,  will  she  have  my  neighhour  Clarke,  or  no  ?
Alice.  What,  Master  Mosbie  !  let  him  woo  himself ! Think  you  that  maids  look  not  for  fair  words  ? Go  to  her,  Clarke  ;  she 's  all  alone  within  ; Michael  my  man  is  clean  out  of  her  books.
Clarke.  I  thank  you,  Mistress  Arden,  I  will  in  ; And  if  fair  Susan  and  I  can  make  a  gree, You  shall  command  me  to  the  uttermost, As  far  as  either  goods  or  life  may  stretch.  550
\Exit  Clarke.
Mosbie.  Now,  Alice,  let 's  hear  thy  news.
Alice.  They  be  so  good  that  I  must  laugh  for  joy, Before  I  can  begin  to  tell  my  tale.
Mosbie.  Let 's  hear  them,  that  I  may  laugh  for  company.
Alice.  This  morning,  Master  Greene,  Dick  Greene  I  mean, From  whom  my  husband  had  the  Abbey  land, Came  hither,  railing,  for  to  know  the  truth Whether  my  husband  had  the  lands  by  grant. I  told  him  all,  whereat  he  stormed  amain ^     And    swore    he    would    cry    quittance     with    the churl,  560
And,  if  he  did  deny  his  interest, Stab  him,  whatsoever  did  befall  himself. Whenas  I  saw  his  choler  thus  to  rise, I  whetted  on  the  gentleman  with  words  ; And,  to  conclude,  Mosbie,  at  last  we  grew To  composition  for  my  husband's  death. 23
ACT  I.  Arden  of  Feversham
I  gave  him  ten  pound  for  to  hire  knaves, By  some  device  to  make  away  the  churl  ; When  he  is  dead,  he  should  have  twenty  more And  repossess  his  former  lands  again.  570
On  this  we  'greed,  and  he  is  ridden  straight To  London,  for  to  bring  his  death  about.
Mosbie.  But  call  you  this  good  news  .?
Alice.  Ay,  sweetheart,  be  they  not .''
Mosbie.   'Twere  cheerful  news  to  hear  the  churl  were dead  ; But  trust  me,  Alice,  I  take  it  passing  ill You  would  be  so  forgetful  of  our  state To  make  recount  of  it  to  every  groom. What  !  to  acquaint  each  stranger  with  our  drifts, Chiefly  in  case  of  murder,  why,  'tis  the  way  580
To  make  it  open  unto  Arden's  self And  bring  thyself  and  me  to  ruin  both. Forewarned,  forearmed  ;  who  threats  his  enemy. Lends  him  a  sword  to  guard  himself  withal.
Alice.  I  did  it  for  the  best.
Mosbie.  Well,  seeing  'tis  done,  cheerly  let  it  pais. You  know  this  Greene  ;  is  he  not  religious  ? A  man,  I  guess,  of  great  devotion  ?
Alice.  He  is.
Mosbie.    Then,   sweet  Alice,   let    it    pass :    I    have    a drift  590
Will  quiet  all,  whatever  is  amiss.
24
Arden  of  Feversham  act  i.
Here  eiiters  Clarke  and  Susan.
Alice.  How  now,  Clarke  ?  have  you  found  me  false? Did  I  not  plead  the  matter  hard  for  you  ?
Clarke.  You  did.
Mosbie.  And  what  ?  wilt  be  a  match  ?
Clarke.  A  match,  i'  faith,  sir  :  ay,  the  day  is  mine. The  painter  lays  his  colours  to  the  life, His  pencil  draws  no  shadows  in  his  love. Susan  is  mine.
Alice.  You  make  her  blush.  600
Mosbie.  What,  sister,  is  it  Clarke  must  be  the  man  ?
Susan.  It  resteth  in  your  grant ;  some  words  are  past, And  haply  we  be  grown  unto  a  match, If  you  be  willing  that  it  shall  be  so.
Mosbie.  Ah,  Master  Clarke,  it  resteth  at  my  grant : You  see  my  sister 's  yet  at  my  dispose, But,  so  you  '11  grant  me  one  thing  I  shall  ask, I  am  content  my  sister  shall  be  yours.
Clarke.  What  is  it,  Master  Mosbie  ?
Mosbie.  I  do  remember  once  in  secret  talk  610
You  told  me  how  you  could  compound  by  art A  crucifix  impoisoned, That  whoso  look  upon  it  should  wax  blind And  with  the  scent  be  stifled,  that  ere  long He  should  die  poisoned  that  did  view  it  well. I  would  have  you  make  me  such  a  crucifix. And  then  I  '11  grant  my  sister  shall  be  yours. 25
ACT  I.  Arden  of  Feversham
Clarke.  Though  I  am  loth,  because  it  toucheth  life,
Yet,  rather  or  I  '11  leave  sweet  Susan's  love,
I  '11  do  it,  and  with  all  the  haste  I  may.  620
But  for  whom  is  it  ? Alice.  Leave  that  to  us.     Why,  Clarke,  is  it  possible
That  you  should  paint  and  draw  it  out  yourself,
The  colours  being  baleful  and  impoisoned,
And  no  ways  prejudice  yourself  withal  ? ATosbie.   Well  questioned,  Alice ;    Clarke,  how  answer
you  that? Clarke.  Very  easily  :  I  '11  tell  you  straight
How  I  do  work  of  these  impoisoned  drugs.
I  fasten  on  my  spectacles  so  close
As  nothing  can  any  way  offend  my  sight ;  630
Then,  as  I  put  a  leaf  within  my  nose,
So  put  I  rhubarb  to  avoid  the  smell.
And  softly  as  another  work  I  paint, Mosbie.  'Tis  very  well ;  but  against  when  shall  I  have  it? Clarke.  Within  this  ten  days. Mosbie.  'Twill  serve  the  turn.
Now,  Alice,  let's  in  and  see  what  cheer  you  keep.
I  hope,  now  Master  Arden  is  from  home.
You  '11  give  me  leave  to  play  your  husband's  part. Alice.  Mosbie,  you  know,  who  's  master  of  my  heart.
He  well  may  be  the  master  of  the  house.  640
\Exeunt.
26
Arden  of  Feversham  act  ii.  sc.  i.
ACT    II
SCENE  I
Country  between  Feversham  and  London.
Enter  Greene  and  Bradshaw.
Bradshaw.   See  you  them  that  comes  yonder,  Master
Greene  ? Greene.  Ay,  very  well :  do  you  know  them  ?
Here  enters  Black  Will  and  Shakebag.
Bradshaw.  The  one  I  know  not,  but  he  seems  a  knave Chiefly  for  bearing  the  other  company ; For  such  a  slave,  so  vile  a  rogue  as  he. Lives  not  again  upon  the  earth. Black  Will  is  his  name.     I  tell  you.  Master  Greene, At  Boulogne  he  and  I  were  fellow-soldiers, Where  he  played  such  pranks
As  all  the  camp  feared  him  for  his  villainy  lo
I  warrant  you  he  bears  so  bad  a  mind That  for  a  crown  he'll  murder  any  man.
Greene.  The  fitter  is  he  for  my  purpose,  marry  ! 27
ACT  II.  sc.  I.  Arden  of  Feversham
Will.  How  now,  fellow  Bradshaw?     Whither  away  so early  ?
Bradshaw.  O  Will,  times  are  changed  :  no  fellows  now, Though  we  were  once  together  in  the  field  ; Yet  thy  friend  to  do  thee  any  good  I  can.
Will.  Why,  Bradshaw,  was  not  thou  and  I  fellow- soldiers  at  Boulogne,  where  I  was  a  corporal,  and thou  but  a  base  mercenary  groom?  No  fellows now  !  because  you  are  a  goldsmith  and  have  a  little plate  in  your  shop  !  You  were  glad  to  call  me 'fellow  Will,'  and  with  a  curtsey  to  the  earth,  *  One snatch,  good  corporal,'  when  I  stole  the  half  ox from  John  the  victualer,  and  domineer'd  with  it amongst  good  fellows  in  one  night.
Bradshaw.  Ay,  Will,  those  days  are  past  with  me.       27
Will.  Ay,  but  they  be  not  past  with  me,  for  I  keep  that same  honourable  mind  still.  Good  neighbour  Brad- shaw, you  are  too  proud  to  be  my  fellow  ;  but  were it  not  that  I  see  more  company  coming  down  the hill,  I  would  be  fellows  with  you  once  more,  and share  crowns  with  you  too.  But  let  that  pass,  and tell  me  whither  you  go.
Bradshaw.  To  London,  Will,  about  a  piece  of  service, Wherein  haply  thou  mayest  pleasure  me.
Will.  What  is  it?
Bradshaw.  Of  late  Lord  Cheiny  lost  some  plate. Which  one  did  bring  and  sold  it  at  my  shop, Saying  he  served  Sir  Antony  Cooke.  40
Arden  of  Feversham  act  ii.  sc.  *
A  search  was  made,  the  plate  was  found  with  me,
And  I  am  bound  to  answer  at  the  'size.
Now,  Lord  Cheiny  solemnly  vows,  if  law
Will  serve  him,  he'll  hang  me  for  his  plate.
Now  I  am  going  to  London  upon  hope
To  find  the  fellow.     Now,  Will,  I  know
Thou  art  acquainted  with  such  companions.
Will.  What  manner  of  man  was  he  ?
Bradshaw.  A  lean-faced  writhen  knave,
Hawk-nosed  and  very  hollow-eyed,  50
With  mighty  furrows  in  his  stormy  brows  ;
Long  hair  down  his  shoulders  curled  ;
His  chin  was  bare,  but  on  his  upper  lip
A  mutchado,  which  he  wound  about  his  ear.
Will.  What  apparel  had  he  ?
Bradshaw.  A  watchet  satin  doublet  all-to  torn, The  inner  side  did  bear  the  greater  show  ; A  pair  of  thread-bare  velvet  hose,  seam  rent, A  worsted  stocking  rent  above  the  shoe, A  livery  cloak,  but  all  the  lace  was  off ;  60
'Twas  bad,  but  yet  it  served  to  hide  the  plate.
Will.  Sirrah  Shakebag,  canst  thou  remember  since  we trolled  the  bowl  at  Sittingburgh,  where  I  broke  the tapster's  head  of  the  Lion  with  a  cudgel-stick  ?
Shakebag.  Ay,  very  well,  Will.
Will.  Why,  it  was  with  the  money  that  the  plate  was sold  for.    Sirrah  Bradshaw,  what  wilt  thou  give  him that  can  tell  thee  who  sold  thy  plate  ? 29
ACT  II.  sc.  I.  Arden  of  Feversham
Bradshaw.  Who,  I  pray  thee,  good  Will  ?
Will.  Why_,  'twas  one  Jack  Fitten.  He's  now  in  New- gate for  stealing  a  horse,  and  shall  be  arraigned  the next  'size.  72
Bradshaw.  Wliy,  then  let  Lord  Cheiny  seek  Jack  Fitten forth, For  I  '11  back  and  tell  him  who  robbed  him  of  his
plate. This  cheers  my  heart ;  Master  Greene,  I  '11  leave  you, For  I  must  to  the  Isle  of  Sheppy  with  speed.
Greene.  Before  you  go,  let  me  intreat  you
To  carry  this  letter  to  Mistress  Arden  of  Feversham And  humbly  recommend  me  to  herself.
Bradshaw.  That  will  I,  Master  Greene,  and  so  farewell.  80 Here,  Will,  there 's  a  crown  for  thy  good  news.
{Exit  B7'adshaw.
Will.  Farewell,  Bradshaw  ;  I  '11  drink  no  water  for  thy sake  whilst  this  lasts. — Now,  gentleman,  shall  we have  your  company  to  London  ?
Greene.  Nay,  stay,  sirs  :
A  little  more  I  needs  must  use  your  help.
And  in  a  matter  of  great  consequence.
Wherein  if  you'll  be  secret  and  profound,
I  '11  give  you  twenty  angels  for  your  pains.  89
Will.  How?  twenty  angels?  give  my  fellow  George Shakebag  and  me  twenty  angels?  And  if  thou 'It have  thy  own  father  slain,  that  thou  may'st  inherit his  land,  we'll  kill  him.  90
Arden  of  Feversham  act  ii.  sc.  i.
Shakebag.  Ay,  thy  mother,  thy  sister,  thy  brother,  or  all thy  kin.
Greene.  Well,  this  it  is  :  Arden  of  Feversham
Hath  highly  wronged  me  about  the  Abbey  land, That  no  revenge  but  death  will  serve  the  turn. Will  you  two  kill  him?  here's  the  angels  down, And  I  will  lay  the  platform  of  his  death.  loo
Will.  Plat  me  no  platforms  ;  give  me  the  money,  and I  '11  stab  him  as  he  stands  pissing  against  a  wall,  but I  '11  kill  him.
Shakebag.  Where  is  he  ?
Greeiie.  He  is  now  at  London,  in  Aldersgate  Street.
Shakebag.  He 's  dead  as  if  he  had  been  condemned  by an  Act  of  Parliament,  if  once  Black  Will  and  I swear  his  death.
Greene.  Here  is  ten  pound,  and  when  he  is  dead,
Ye  shall  have  twenty  more.  no
Will.  My  fingers  itches  to  be  at  the  peasant.  Ah,  that I  might  be  set  a  work  thus  through  the  year,  and that  murder  would  grow  to  an  occupation,  that  a man  might  follow  without  danger  of  law  : — zounds,  I warrant  I  should  be  warden  of  the  company  I  Come, let  us  be  going,  and  we  'U  bait  at  Rochester,  where I  '11  give  thee  a  gallon  of  sack  to  handsel  the  match withal.  \Exe2ini,
31
ACT  II.  sc.  a.  Arden  of  Feversham
SCENE  II
London.     A  Street  near  St.  FauPs.
Enter  Michael.
Michael.  I  have  gotten  such  a  letter  as  will  touch  the painter  :     And  thus  it  is  :
Here  enters  Arden  and  Franklin  and  hears  Michael read  this  letter.
*  My  duty  remembered,  Mistress  Susan,  hoping  in  God you  be  in  good  health,  as  I  Michael  was  at  the making  hereof.  This  is  to  certify  you  that  as  the turtle  true,  when  she  hath  lost  her  mate,  sitteth alone,  so  I,  mourning  for  your  absence,  do  walk up  and  down  Paul's  till  one  day  I  fell  asleep  and lost  my  master's  pantofles.  Ah,  Mistress  Susan, abolish  that  paltry  painter,  cut  him  off  by  the shins  with  a  frowning  look  of  your  crabbed  counten- ance, and  think  upon  Michael,  who,  drunk  with the  dregs  of  your  favour,  will  cleave  as  fast  to  your love  as  a  plaster  of  pitch  to  a  galled  horse-back. Thus  hoping  you  will  let  my  passions  penetrate,  or rather  impetrate  mercy  of  your  meek  hands,  I  end. '  Yours,  Michael,  or  else  not  Michael.'
Arden  of  Feversham  act  ii.  sc.  «.
Arden.  Why,  you  paltry  knave,
Stand  you  here  loitering,  knowing  my  affairs, What  haste  my  business  craves  to  send  to  Kent  ?  20
Franklin.  Faith,  friend  Michael,  this  is  very  ill, Knowing  your  master  hath  no  more  but  you, And  do  ye  slack  his  business  for  your  own  ?
Arden.  Where  is  the  letter,  sirrah?  let  me  see  it.
[  Then  he  gives  him  the  letter. See,  Master  Franklin,  here's  proper  stuff: Susan  my  maid,  the  painter,  and  my  man, A  crew  of  harlots,  all  in  love,  forsooth  ; Sirrah,  let  me  hear  no  more  of  this. Nor  for  thy  life  once  write  to  her  a  word.
Here  enters  Greene^  PVill,  and  Shakebag.
Wilt  thou  be  married  to  so  base  a  trull  ?  30
'Tis  Mosbie's  sister  :  come  I  once  at  home, I  '11  rouse  her  from  remaining  in  my  house. -   Now,  Master  Franklin,  let  us  go  walk  in  Paul's  ; Come  but  a  turn  or  two,  and  then  away.
\Exeunt. Greene.  The  first  is  Arden,  and  that 's  his  man,
The  other  is  Franklin,  Arden's  dearest  friend. Will.  Zounds,  I  '11  kill  them  all  three. Greene.  Nay,  sirs,  touch  not  his  man  in  any  case  ; But  stand  close,  and  take  you  fittest  standing. And  at  his  coming  forth  speed  him. :  40
33
ACT  II.  sc.  a.  Arden  of  Feversham
To  the  Nag's  Head,  there  is  this  coward's  haunt.
But  now  I  '11  leave  you  till  the  deed  be  done.
[Exit  Greene. Shakebag.  If  he  be  not  paid  his  own,  ne'er  trust  Shakebag. Will.  Sirrah  Shakebag,  at  his  coming  forth  I  '11  run  him
through,   and  then   to   the  Blackfriars,  and  there
take  water  and  away. Shakebag.  Why,  that's  the  best ;  but  see  thou  miss  him  not. Will.  How  can  I  miss  him,  when  I  think  on  the  forty
angels  I  must  have  more  ?
Here  enters  Prentice.
Prentice.  'Tis  very  late  ;  I  were  best  shut  up  my  stall, for  here  will  be  old  filching,  when  the  press  comes forth  of  Paul's.  52
\Then   lets  he   down    his    window,   and it  breaks  Black  WilVs  head. Will.  Zounds,  draw,  Shakebag,  I  am  almost  killed. Prentice.  We  '11  tame  you,  I  warrant. Will.  Zounds,  I  am  tame  enough  already.
Here  eftters  Arden,  Franklin,  and  Michael.
Arden.  What  troublesome  fray  or  mutiny  is  this? Franklin.  'Tis  nothing  but  some  brabling  paltry  fray,
Devised  to  pick  men's  pockets  in  the  throng. Arden.  Is't  nothing  else?  come,  Franklin,  let's  away,
{^Exeunt. Will.  What  'mends  shall  I  have  for  my  broken  head  ?  60 34
Arden  of  Feversham  act  ii.  sc.  ».
Prentice.  Marry,  this  'mends,  that  if  you  get  you  not away  all  the  sooner,  you  shall  be  well  beaten  and sent  to  the  Counter.  \Exit  Prentice.
Will.  Well,  I  '11  be  gone,  but  look  to  your  signs,  for  I  '11 pull  them  down  all.  Shakebag,  my  broken  head grieves  me  not  so  much  as  by  this  means  Arden hath  escaped.
Here  enters  Greene.
I  had  a  glimpse  of  him  and  his  companion.
Greene.  Why,  sirs,  Arden 's  as  well  as  I  ;  I  met  him  and Franklin  going  merrily  to  the  ordinary.  What,  dare you  not  do  it?  7 1
Will.  Yes,  sir,  we  dare  do  it  ;  but,  were  my  consent  to give  again,  we  would  not  do  it  under  ten  pound more.  I  value  every  drop  of  my  blood  at  a  French crown.  I  have  had  ten  pound  to  steal  a  dog,  and  we have  no  more  here  to  kill  a  man  ;  but  that  a  bargain is  a  bargain,  and  so  forth,  you  should  do  it  yourself.
Greene.  I  pray  thee,  how  came  thy  head  broke  ?
Will.  Why,  thou  seest  it  is  broke,  dost  thou  not  ?         79
Shakebag.  Standing  against  a  stall,  watching  Arden's coming,  a  boy  let  down  his  shop-window  and  broke his  head;  whereupon  arose  a  brawl,  and  in  the tumult  Arden  escaped  us  and  passed  by  unthought on.  But  forbearance  is  no  acquittance ;  another time  we  '11  do  it,  I  warrant  thee.
Greene.  I  pray  thee,  Will,  make  clean  thy  bloody  brow, D  35
ACT  II.  sc.  a.  Arden  of  Feversham
And  let  us  bethink  us  on  some  other  place Where  Arden  may  be  met  with  handsomely. Remember  how  devoutly  thou  hast  sworn To  kill  the  villain  ;  think  upon  thine  oath.  90
WV//.  Tush,  I  have  broken  five  hundred  oaths  ! But  wouldst  thou  charm  me  to  effect  this  deed, Tell  me  of  gold,  my  resolution's  fee  ; Say  thou  seest  Mosbie  kneeling  at  my  knees, Offering  me  service  for  my  high  attempt, And  sweet  Alice  Arden,  with  a  lap  of  crowns, Comes  with  a  lowly  curtsey  to  the  earth, Saying  *  Take  this  but  for  thy  quarterage, Such  yearly  tribute  will  I  answer  thee.' Why,  this  would  steel  soft-mettled  cowardice,      loo W^ith  which  Black  Will  was  never  tainted  yet. I  tell  thee,  Greene,  the  forlorn  traveller, Whose  lips  are  glued  with  summer's  parching  heat. Ne'er  longed  so  much  to  see  a  running  brook As  I  to  finish  Arden's  tragedy. Seest  thou  this  gore  that  cleaveth  to  my  face? From  hence  ne'er  will  I  wash  this  bloody  stain, Till  Arden's  heart  be  panting  in  my  hand.
Greene.  Why,  that's  well  said  ;  but  what  saith  Shake- bag  ?
Shakebag.  I  cannot  paint  my  valour  out  with  words  :  1 10 But,  give  me  place  and  opportunity, Such  mercy  as  the  starven  lioness. When  she  is  dry  sucked  of  her  eager  young, 36
Arden  of  Feversham  act  ii.  sc.  z.
Shows  to  the  prey  that  next  encounters  her, On  Arden  so  much  pity  would  I  take. Greene.  So  should  it  fare  with  men  of  firm  resolve. And  now,  sirs,  seeing  that  this  accident Of  meeting  him  in  Paul's  hath  no  success. Let  us  bethink  us  of  some  other  place Whose  earth  may  swallow  up  this  Arden's  blood.
Here  eftters  Michael.
See,  yonder  comes  his  man  :  and  wot  you  what  ?  121
The  foolish  knave's  in  love  with  Mosbie's  sister,
And  for  her  sake,  whose  love  he  cannot  get
Unless  Mosbie  solicit  his  suit.
The  villain  hath  sworn  the  slaughter  of  his  master.
We'll  question  him,  for  he  may  stead  us  much, —
How  now,  Michael,  whither  are  you  going? Michael.  My  master  hath  new  supped.
And  I  am  going  to  prepare  his  chamber. Greene.  Where  supped  Master  Arden  ?  130
Michael.   At  the   Nag's    Head,  at  the  eighteen  pence
ordinary.      How    now,    Master    Shakebag.'*    what,
Black  Will !     God's  dear  lady,  how   chance  your
face  is  so  bloody  ? Will.  Go  to,  sirrah,  there  is  a  chance  in  it ;  this  sauci-
ness  in  you  will  make  you  be  knocked. Michael.  Nay,  an  you  be  offended,  I  '11  be  gone. Greene.  Stay,  Michael,  you  may  not  escape  us  so.
Michael,  I  know  you  love  your  master  well. 11
ACT  II.  sc. «.  Arden  of  Feversham
Michael  Why,  so  I  do ;  but  wherefore  urge  you  that  ?
Greene.  Because  I  think  you  love  your  mistress  better.
Michael.  So  think  not  I ;  but  say,  i'faith,  what,  if  I  should?
Shakebag.  Come  to  the  purpose,  Michael  ;  we  hear  143 You  have  a  pretty  love  in  Feversham.
Michael.  Why,  have  I  two  or  three,  what 's  that  to  thee  !
Will.  You  deal  too  mildly  with  the  peasant.     Thus  it  is : 'Tis  known  to  us  that  you  love  Mosbie's  sister ; We  know  besides  that  you  have  ta'en  your  oath To  further  Mosbie  to  your  mistress'  bed, And  kill  your  master  for  his  sister's  sake. Now,  sir,  a  poorer  coward  than  yourself  150
W^as  never  fostered  in  the  coast  of  Kent  : How  comes  it  then  that  such  a  knave  as  you Dare  swear  a  matter  of  such  consequence  ?
Greene.  Ah,  Will  
Will.  Tush,  give  me  leave,  there 's  no  more  but  this  : Sith  thou  hast  sworn,  we  dare  discover  all ; And  hadst  thou  or  should'st  thou  utter  it, We  have  devised  a  complat  under  hand, Whatever  shall  betide  to  any  of  us. To  send  thee  roundly  to  the  devil  of  hell.  160
And  therefore  thus  :  I  am  the  very  man, Marked  in  my  birth-hour  by  the  destinies. To  give  an  end  to  Arden's  life  on  earth ; Thou  but  a  member  but  to  whet  the  knife Whose  edge  must  search  the  closet  of  his  breast : Thy  office  is  but  to  appoint  the  place, 38
Arden  of  Feversham  act  ii.  sc.  z.
And  train  thy  master  to  his  tragedy  ;
Mine  to  perform  it  when  occasion  serves.
Then  be  not  nice,  but  here  devise  with  us
How  and  what  way  we  may  conclude  his  death.  170
Shakebag.    So    shalt    thou    purchase    Mosbie  for  thy friend, And  by  his  friendship  gain  his  sister's  love.
Greene.  So  shall  thy  mistress  be  thy  favourer,
And  thou  disburdened  of  the  oath  thou  made.
Michael.  Well,  gentlemen,  I  cannot  but  confess, Sith  you  have  urged  me  so  apparently, That  I  have  vowed  my  master  Arden's  death ; And  he  whose  kindly  love  and  liberal  hand Doth    challenge    nought    but    good    deserts   of
me, I  will  deliver  over  to  your  hands.  iSo
This  night  come  to  his  house  at  Aldersgate  : The  doors  I  '11  leave  unlock'd  against  you  come. No  sooner  shall  ye  enter  through  the  latch, Over  the  threshold  to  the  inner  court, But  on  your  left  hand  shall  you  see  the  stairs That  leads  directly  to  my  master's  chamber  : There  take  him  and  dispose  him  as  ye  please. Now  it  were  good  we  parted  company ; What  I  have  promised,  I  will  perform.
Will.    Should   you  deceive  us,  'twould  go  wrong  with you.  190
Michael.  I  will  accomplish  all  I  have  revealed. 39
ACT  II.  sc.  2.  Arden  of  Feversham
Will.  Come,  let 's  go  drink  :  choler  makes  me  as  dry  as a  dog.  190
[^Exeunt    Will,    Greene,    and   Shakebag. Manet  Michael.
Michael.  Thus  feeds  the  lamb  securely  on  the  down, Whilst  through  the  thicket  of  an  arbour  brake The  hunger-bitten  wolf  o'erpries  his  haunt And  takes  advantage  for  to  eat  him  up. Ah,  harmless  Arden,  how  hast  thou  misdone, That  thus  thy  gentle  life  is  levelled  at  ? The  many  good  turns  that  thou  hast  done  to  me.  200 Now  must  I  quittance  with  betraying  thee. I  that  should  take  the  weapon  in  my  hand And  buckler  thee  from  ill-intending  foes. Do  lead  thee  with  a  wicked  fraudful  smile, As  unsuspected,  to  the  slaughter-house. So  have  I  sworn  to  Mosbie  and  my  mistress, So  have  I  promised  to  the  slaughtermen  ; And  should  I  not  deal  currently  with  them. Their  lawless  rage  would  take  revenge  on  me. Tush,  I  will  spurn  at  mercy  for  this  once  :  210
Let  pity  lodge  where  feeble  women  lie, I  am  resolved,  and  Arden  needs  must  die.
S^Exit  Michael.
40
Arden  of  Feversham  act  hi.  sc.  x.
ACT    III
SCENE  I
A  Room  in  Franklin! s  House ^  at  Alder sgate.
Enter  Arden  and  Franklin.
Arden.  No,  Franklin,  no  :  if  fear  or  stormy  threats, If  love  of  me  or  care  of  womanhood, If  fear  of  God  or  common  speech  of  men, WTio  mangle  credit  with  their  wounding  words, And  couch  dishonour  as  dishonour  buds, Might  join  repentance  in  her  wanton  thoughts, No  question  then  but  she  would  turn  the  leaf And  sorrow  for  her  dissolution  ; But  she  is  rooted  in  her  wickedness. Perverse  and  stubborn,  not  to  be  reclaimed  ;  lo
Good  counsel  is  to  her  as  rain  to  weeds, And  reprehension  makes  her  vice  to  grow As  Hydra's  head  that  plenished  by  decay. Her  faults,  methink,  are  painted  in  my  face, For  every  searching  eye  to  overread  ; And  Mosbie's  name,  a  scandal  unto  mine, 41
ACT  III.  sc.  X.  Arden  of  Fevershara
Is  deeply  trenched  in  my  blushing  brow.
Ah,  Franklin,  Franklin,  when  I  think  on  this,
My  heart's  grief  rends  my  other  powers
Worse  than  the  conflict  at  the  hour  of  death.  20
Franklin.  Gentle  Arden,  leave  this  sad  lament  : She  will  amend,  and  so  your  griefs  will  cease  ; Or  else  she  '11  die,  and  so  your  sorrows  end. If  neither  of  these  two  do  haply  fall, Yet  let  your  comfort  be  that  others  bear Your  woes,  twice  doubled  all,  with  patience.
Arden.  My  house  is  irksome  ;  there  I  cannot  rest.
Franklin.  Then  stay  with  me  in. London  ;  go  not  home.
Arden.  Then  that  base  Mosbie  doth  usurp  my  room And  makes  his  triumph  of  my  being  thence.  30
At  home  or  not  at  home,  where'er  I  be, Here,  here  it  lies,  ah  Franklin,  here  it  lies That  will  not  out  till  wretched  Arden  dies.
Here  enters  Michael. Franklin.  Forget  your  griefs  a  while  ;  here  comes  your
man. Arden.  What  a-clock  is 't,  sirrah  ? Michael.  Almost  ten.
Arden.  See,  see,  how  runs  away  the  weary  time  1 Come,  Master  Franklin,  shall  we  go  to  bed  ?
[Exeunl  Arden  and  Michael, Manet  Franklin. Franklin.  I  pray  you,  go  before  :  I  '11  follow  you. 42
Arden  of  Feversham  act  hi.  sc.  i.
— Ah,  what  a  hell  is  fretful  jealousy  !  4"^
What  pity-moving  words,  what  deep-fetched  sighs,
What  grievous  groans  and  overlading  woes
Accompanies  this  gentle  gentleman  !
Now  will  he  shake  his  care-oppressed  head,
Then  fix  his  sad  eyes  on  the  sullen  earth.
Ashamed  to  gaze  upon  the  open  world  ;
Now  will  he  cast  his  eyes  up  towards  the  heavens,
Looking  that  ways  for  redress  of  wrong  :
Sometimes  he  seeketh  to  beguile  his  grief
And  tells  a  story  with  his  careful  tongue  ;  50
Then  comes  his  wife's  dishonour  in  his  thoughts
And  in  the  middle  cutteth  off  his  tale,
Pouring  fresh  sorrow  on  his  weary  limbs.
So  woe-begone,  so  inly  charged  with  woe,
Was  never  any  lived  and  bare  it  so.
Here  enters  Michael.
Michael.  My  master  would  desire  you  come  to  bed.
Franklin.  Is  he  himself  already  in  his  bed  .''
\Exit  Franklin.     Manet  Michael.
Michael.  He  is,  and  fain  would  have  the  light  away. — Conflicting  thoughts,  encamped  in  my  breast, Awake  me  with  the  echo  of  their  strokes,  60
And  I,  a  judge  to  censure  either  side, Can  give  to  neither  wished  victory. My  master's  kindness  pleads  to  me  for  life With  just  demand,  and  I  must  grant  it  him  : 43
ACT  III.  sc.  1.  Arden  of  Feversham
My  mistress  she  hath  forced  me  with  an  oath,
For  Susan's  sake,  the  which  I  may  not  break.
For  that  is  nearer  than  a  master's  love  :
That  grim-faced  fellow,  pitiless  Black  Will,
And  Shakebag,  stern  in  bloody  stratagem,
— Two  rougher  ruffians  never  lived  in  Kent, —       70
Have  sworn  my  death,  if  I  infringe  my  vow,
A  dreadfal  thing  to  be  considered  of.
Methinks  I  see  them  with  their  bolstered  hair
Staring  and  grinning  in  thy  gentle  face.
And  in  their  ruthless  hands  their  daggers  drawn,
Insulting  o'er  thee  with  a  peck  of  oaths.
Whilst  thou  submissive,  pleading  for  relief,
Art  mangled  by  their  ireful  instruments.
Methinks  I  hear  them  ask  where  Michael  is,
And  pitiless  Black  Will  cries  :  '  Stab  the  slave  !      80
The  peasant  will  detect  the  tragedy  ! '
The  wrinkles  in  his  foul  death-threat'ning  face
Gapes  open  wide,  like  graves  to  swallow  men.
My  death  to  him  is  but  a  merriment.
And  he  will  murder  me  to  make  him  sport.
He  comes,  he  comes  !  ah.  Master  Franklin,  help  I
Call  on  the  neighbours,  or  we  are  but  dead !
Here  enters  Franklin  and  Arden.
Franklin.  What  dismal  outcry  calls  me  from  my  rest  ? Arden.  What  hath  occasioned  such  a  fearful  cry?
Speak,  Michael:  hath  any  injured  thee?  90
44
Arden  of  Feversham  act  hi.,  sc.  «
Michael.  Nothing,  sir ;  but  as  I  fell  asleep, Upon  the  threshold  leaning  to  the  stairs, I  had  a  fearful  dream  that  troubled  me, And  in  my  slumber  thought  I  was  beset With  murderer  thieves  that  came  to  rifle  me. My  trembling  joints  witness  my  inward  fear  : I  crave  your  pardons  for  disturbing  you.
Arden.  So  great  a  cry  for  nothing  I  ne'er  heard.
Wliat  1    are  the  doors  fast  locked  and  all  things safe?
Michael.  I  cannot  tell ;   I  think  I  locked  the  doors.    loo
Arde?2.  I  like  not  this,  but  I  '11  go  see  myself. —
Ne'er  trust  me  but  the  doors  were  all  unlocked: This  negligence  not  half  contenteth  me. Get  you  to  bed,  and  if  you  love  my  favour, Let  me  have  no  more  such  pranks  as  these. Come,  Master  FrankHn,  let  us  go  to  bed.
Franklin.  Ay,  by  my  faith  ;  the  air  is  very  cold. Michael,  farewell ;  I  pray  thee  dream  no  more.
[Exeunt.
SCENE   II
Outside  Franklin's  house.
Here  enters  Will.,  Greene.,  and  Shakebag.
Shakebag.  Black  night  hath  hid  the  pleasures  of  the  day, And  sheeting  darkness  overhangs  the  earth. And  with  the  black  fold  of  her  cloudy  robe 45
ACT  III.  sc.  2.  Arden  of  Feversham
Obscures  us  from  the  eyesight  of  the  world,
In  which  sweet  silence  such  as  we  triumph.
The  lazy  minutes  linger  on  their  time,
As  loth  to  give  due  audit  to  the  hour,
Till  in  the  watch  our  purpose  be  complete
And  Arden  sent  to  everlasting  night.
Greene,  get  you  gone,  and  linger  here  about,  lo
And  at  some  hour  hence  come  to  us  again.
Where  we  will  give  you  instance  of  his  death. Gree7ie.    Speed  to   my  wish,    whose  will  so   e'er   says no ;
And  so  I  '11  leave  you  for  an  hour  or  two.
\Exit  Greene. Will.    I   tell  thee,    Shakebag,   would   this   thing   were done  :
I  am  so  heavy  that  I  can  scarce  go  ;
This  drowsiness  in  me  bodes  little  good. Shakebag.  How  now.  Will  ?  become  a  precis'.an  ?
Nay,  then  let's  go  sleep,  when  bugs  and  fears
Shall  kill  our  courages  with  their  fancy's  work.      20 Will.  Why,  Shakebag,  thou  mistakes  me  much,
And  wrongs  me  too  in  telling  me  of  fear.
Were 't  not  a  serious  thing  we  go  about.
It  should  be  slipt  till  I  had  fought  with  thee,
To  let  thee  know  I  am  no  coward,  I.
I  tell  thee,  Shakebag,  thou  abusest  me. Shakebag.  Why,  thy  speech  bewrayed  an  inly  kind  of fear,
46
Arden  of  Feversham  act  hi.  sc.  ».
And  savoured  of  a  weak  relenting  spirit. Go  forward  now  in  that  we  have  begun, And  afterwards  attempt  me  when  thou  darest.       30
Will.  And  if  I  do  not,  heaven  cut  me  off!
But  let  that  pass,  and  show  me  to  this  house, Where  thou  shalt  see  I  '11  do  as  much  as  Shakebag.
Shakebag.    This   is   the  door;    but   soft,  methinks  'tis shut. The  villain  Michael  hath  deceived  us.
Will.  Soft,  let  me  see,  Shakebag ;  'tis  shut  indeed.
Knock  with  thy  sword,  perhaps  the  slave  will  hear.
Shakebag.  It  will  not  be ;  the  white-livered  peasant Is  gone  to  bed,  and  laughs  us  both  to  scorn.
Will.  And  he  shall  buy  his  merriment  as  dear  40-
As  ever  coistril  bought  so  little  sport : Ne'er  let  this  sword  assist  me  when  I  need, But  rust  and  canker  after  I  have  sworn. If  I,  the  next  time  that  I  meet  the  hind, Lop  not  away  his  leg,  his  arm,  or  both.
Shakebag.  And  let  me  never  draw  a  sword  again. Nor  prosper  in  the  twilight,  cockshut  light. When  I  would  fleece  the  wealthy  passenger. But  lie  and  languish  in  a  loathsome  den. Hated  and  spit  at  by  the  goers-by,  50
And  in  that  death  may  die  unpitied. If  I,  the  next  time  that  I  meet  the  slave, Cut  not  the  nose  from  off  the  coward's  face And  trample  on  it  for  this  villainy. 47
ACT  III.  sc.  3.  Arden  of  Feversham
Will.  Come,  let 's  go  seek  out  Greene ;  I  know  he  '11  swear.
Shakebag.  He  were  a  villain,  an  he  would  not  swear. 'Twould  make  a  peasant  swear  among  his  boys, That  ne'er  durst  say  before  but  '  yea '  and  '  no,' To  be  thus  flouted  of  a  coistril.
Will.   Shakebag,  let's    seek  out   Greene,   and  in  the morning  60
At  the  alehouse  butting  Arden's  house Watch  the  out-coming  of  that  prick-eared  cur. And  then  let  me  alone  to  handle  him.  \Exeunt.
SCENE  III
Room  in  Franklin^ s  house  as  before. Here  enters  Arden^  Franklin^  and  Michael
Arden.  Sirrah,  get  you  back  to  Billingsgate
And  learn  what  time  the  tide  will  serve  our  turn ; Come  to  us  in  Paul's.    First  go  make  the  bed, And  afterwards  go  hearken  for  the  flood.
\^Exit  Michael. Come,  Master  Franklin,  you  shall  go  with  me. This  night  I  dreamt  that,  being  in  a  park, A  toil  was  pitched  to  overthrow  the  deer. And  I  upon  a  little  rising  hill Stood  whistly  watching  for  the  herd's  approach. 48
Arden  of  Feversham  act  hi.  sc.  3.
Even  there,  methoughts,  a  gentle  slumber  took  me,  10
And  summoned  all  my  parts  to  sweet  repose;
But  in  the  pleasure  of  this  golden  rest
An  ill-thewed  foster  had  removed  the  toil,
And  rounded  me  with  that  beguiling  home
Which  late,  methought,   was  pitched  to  cast  the
deer. With  that  he  blew  an  evil-sounding  horn, And  at  the  noise  another  herdman  came. With  falchion  drawn,  and  bent  it  at  my  breast, Crying  aloud,  '  Thou  art  the  game  we  seek ! ' With  this  I  woke  and  trembled  every  joint,  20
Like  one  obscured  in  a  Httle  bush, That  sees  a  lion  foraging  about, And,  when  the  dreadful  forest-king  is  gone, He  pries  about  with  timorous  suspect Throughout  the  thorny  casements  of  the  brake, And  will  not  think  his  person  dangerless. But  quakes  and  shivers,  though  the  cause  be  gone: So,  trust  me,  Franklin,  when  I  did  awake, I  stood  in  doubt  whether  I  waked  or  no  : Such  great  impression  took  this  fond  surprise.       30 God  grant  this  vision  bedeem  me  any  good. Franklin.     This    fantasy    doth    rise    from     Michael's
fear. Who  being  awaked  with  the  noise  he  made. His  troubled  senses  yet  could  take  no  rest ; And  this,  I  warrant  you,  procured  your  dream 49
ACT  III.  sc.  4.  Arden  of  Feversham
Arden.  It  may  be  so,  God  frame  it  to  the  best : But  oftentimes  my  dreams  presage  too  true.
Franklin.  To  such  as  note  their  nightly  fantasies, Some  one  in  twenty  may  incur  belief; But  use  it  not,  'tis  but  a  mockery.  40
Arden.  Come,  Master  Franklin  ;  we  '11  now  walk  in  Paul's And  dine  together  at  the  ordinary. And  by  my  man's  direction  draw  to  the  quay, And  with  the  tide  go  down  to  Feversham. Say,  Master  Franklin,  shall  it  not  be  so  ?
Franklifi.   At  your  good  pleasure,  sir ;    I  '11  bear  you company.  [Exeunt.
SCENE  IV
A  Idersgate.
Here  enters  Michael  at  07ie  door.
Here  enters  Greene^  Will^  and  Shakebag  at another  door.
Will.  Draw,  Shakebag,  for  here  's  that  villain  Michael.
Greene.  First,  Will,  let 's  hear  what  he  can  say.
Will.  Speak,  milksop  slave,  and  never  after  speak.
Michael.  For  God's  sake,  sirs,  let  me  excuse  myself: For  here  I  swear,  by  heaven  and  earth  and  all, I  did  perform  the  utmost  of  my  task. And  left  the  doors  unbolted  and  unlocked. 50
Arden  of  Feversham  act  hi.  sc.  4.
But  see  the  chance  :  Franklin  and  my  master
Were  very  late  conferring  in  the  porch,
And  Franklin  left  his  napkin  where  he  sat  10
With  certain  gold  knit  in  it,  as  he  said.
Being  in  bed,  he  did  bethink  himself,
And  coming  down  he  found  the  doors  unshut  :
He  locked  the  gates,  and  brought  away  the  keys,
For  which  offence  my  master  rated  me.
But  now  I  am  going  to  see  what  flood  it  is,
For  with  the  tide  my  master  will  away  ;
Where  you  may  front  him  well  on  Rainham  Down,
A  place  well-fitting  such  a  stratagem.
Will.  Your  excuse  hath  somewhat  mollified  my  choler. Why  now,  Greene,  'tis  better  now  nor  e'er  it  was.  21
Greene.  But,  Michael,  is  this  true  }
Michael.  As  true  as  I  report  it  to  be  true.
Shakebag.  Then,  Michael,  this  shall  be  your  penance, To  feast  us  all  at  the  Salutation, Where  we  will  plat  our  purpose  thoroughly.
Greene.  And,  Michael,  you  shall  bear  no  news  of  this tide. Because  they  two  may  be  in  Rainham  Down Before  your  master.
Michael.  Why,  I  '11  agree  to  anything  you  '11  have  me. So  you  will  except  of  my  company.  {Exeunt.
m
ACT  III.  sc.  s.  Arden  of  Feversham
SCENE  V
Arden^s  House  at  Feversham.
Here  enters  Mosbie.
Mosbie.  Disturbed  thoughts  drives  me  from  company And  dries  my  marrow  with  their  watchfulness  ; Continual  trouble  of  my  moody  brain Feebles  my  body  by  excess  of  drink, And  nips  me  as  the  bitter  north-east  wind Doth  check  the  tender  blossoms  in  the  spring. Well  fares  the  man,  howe'er  his  cates  do  taste, That  tables  not  with  foul  suspicion  ; And  he  but  pines  amongst  his  delicates. Whose  troubled  mind  is  stuffed  with  discontent.    lO My  golden  time  was  when  I  had  no  gold  ; Though  then  I  wanted,  yet  I  slept  secure  ; My  daily  toil  begat  me  night's  repose. My  night's  repose  made  daylight  fresh  to  me. But  since  I  climbed  the  top-bough  of  the  tree And  sought  to  build  my  nest  among  the  clouds. Each  gentle  stirry  gale  doth  shake  my  bed. And  makes  me  dread  my  downfall  to  the  earth. But  whither  doth  contemplation  carry  me  ? The  way  I  seek  to  find,  where  pleasure  dwells,      20 Is  hedged  behind  me  that  I  cannot  back, 52
Arden  of  Feversham  act  hi.  sc.  5.
But  needs  must  on,  although  to  danger's  gate.
Then,  Arden,  perish  thou  by  that  decree  ;
For  Greene  doth  ear  the  land  and  weed  thee  up
To  make  my  harvest  nothing  but  pure  corn.
And  for  his  pains  I  '11  hive  him  up  a  while,
And  after  smother  him  to  have  his  wax  :
Such  bees  as  Greene  must  never  live  to  sting.
Then  is  there  Michael  and  the  painter  too,
Chief  actors  to  Arden's  overthrow  ;  30
Who  when  they  shall  see  me  sit  in  Arden's  seat,
They  will  insult  upon  me  for  my  meed.
Or  fright  me  by  detecting  of  his  end.
I  '11  none  of  that,  for  I  can  cast  a  bone
To  make  these  curs  pluck  out  each  other's  throat.
And  then  am  I  sole  ruler  of  mine  own.
Yet  Mistress  Arden  lives  ;  but  she's  myself,
And  holy  Church  rites  makes  us  two  but  one.
But  what  for  that  ?  I  may  not  trust  you,  Alice  :
You  have  supplanted  Arden  for  my  sake,  40
And  will  extirpen  me  to  plant  another.
'Tis  fearful  sleeping  in  a  serpent's  bed,
And  I  will  cleanly  rid  my  hands  of  her.
Here  enters  Alice.
But  here  she  comes,  and  I  must  flatter  her. — How  now,  Alice  ?  what,  sad  and  passionate  ? Make  me  partaker  of  thy  pensiveness  : Fire  divided  burns  with  lesser  force.
ACT  III.  sc.  5.  Arden  of  Feversham
Alice.  But  I  will  dam  that  fire  in  my  breast Till  by  the  force  thereof  my  part  consume. Ah,  Mosbie  !  50
Mosbie.     Such     deep    pathaires,   like    to    a    cannon's burst Discharged  against  a  ruinated  wall, Breaks  my  relenting  heart  in  thousand  pieces. Ungentle  Alice,  thy  sorrow  is  my  sore  ; Thou  know'st  it  well,  and  'tis  thy  policy To  forge  distressful  looks  to  wound  a  breast Where  lies  a  heart  that  dies  when  thou  art  sad. It  is  not  love  that  loves  to  anger  love.
Alice.  It  is  not  love  that  loves  to  murder  love.
Afosbie.  How  mean  you  that  ?  60
A.  lice.  Thou  knowest  how  dearly  Arden  loved  me.
Mosbie.  And  then  ?
AJice.  And  then — conceal  the  rest,  for  'tis  too  bad, Lest  that  my  words  be  carried  with  the  wind, And  published  in  the  world  to  both  our  shames. I  pray  thee,  Mosbie,  let  our  springtime  wither  ; Our  harvest  else  will  yield  but  loathsome  weeds. Forget,  I  pray  thee,  what  hath  passed  betwixt  us, For  how  I  blush  and  tremble  at  the  thoughts !
Mosbie.  What  ?  are  you  changed  ?  ^o
Alice.  Ay,  to  my  former  happy  life  again, From  title  of  an  odious  strumpet's  name To  honest  Arden's  wife,  not  Arden's  honest  wife. Ha,  Mosbie  !  'tis  thou  has  rifled  me  of  that 54
Arden  of  Feversham  act  hi.  sc.  s
And  made  me  slanderous  to  all  my  kin ; Even  in  my  forehead  is  thy  name  ingraven, A  mean  artificer,  that  low-born  name. I  was  bewitched  :  woe  worth  the  hapless  hour And  all  the  causes  that  enchanted  me  ! Mosbie.  Nay,  if  you  ban,  let  me  breathe  curses  forth,  80 And  if  you  stand  so  nicely  at  your  fame. Let  me  repent  the  credit  I  have  lost. I  have  neglected  matters  of  import That  would  have  stated  me  above  thy  state, Forslowed  advantages,  and  spurned  at  time  : Ay,  Fortune's  right  hand  Mosbie  hath  forsook To  take  a  wanton  giglot  by  the  left. I  left  the  marriage  of  an  honest  maid. Whose  dowry  would  have  weighed  down   all  thy
wealth. Whose  beauty  and  demeanour  far  exceeded  thee :  90 This  certain  good  I  lost  for  changing  bad. And  wrapt  my  credit  in  thy  company. I  was  bewitched, — that  is  no  theme  of  thine. And  thou  unhallowed  has  enchanted  me. But  I  will  break  thy  spells  and  exorcisms, And  put  another  sight  upon  these  eyes That  showed  my  heart  a  raven  for  a  dove. Thou  art  not  fair,  I  viewed  thee  not  till  now  ; Thou  art  not  kind,  till  now  I  knew  thee  not ; And  now  the  rain  hath  beaten  off  thy  gilt,  100
Thy  worthless  copper  shows  thee  counterfeit 55
ACT  III.  sc.  5-  Arden  of  Feversham
It  grieves  me  not  to  see  how  foul  thou  art, But  mads  me  that  ever  I  thought  thee  fair. Go,  get  thee  gone,  a  copesmate  for  thy  hinds  ; I  am  too  good  to  be  thy  favourite. Alice.  Ay,  now  I  see,  and  too  soon  find  it  true,
Which  often  hath  been  told  me  by  my  friends, That  Mosbie  loves  me  not  but  for  my  wealth. Which  too  incredulous  I  ne'er  believed. Nay,  hear  me  speak,  Mosbie,  a  word  or  two  ;       lio I  '11  bite  my  tongue  if  it  speak  bitterly. Look  on  me,  Mosbie,  or  I  '11  kill  myself: Nothing  shall  hide  me  from  thy  stormy  look. If  thou  cry  war,  there  is  no  peace  for  me ; I  will  do  penance  for  offending  thee. And  burn  this  prayer-book,  where  I  here  use The  holy  word  that  had  converted  me. See,  Mosbie,  I  v/ill  tear  away  the  leaves, And  all  the  leaves,  and  in  this  golden  cover Shall  thy  sweet  phrases  and  thy  letters  dwell ;     120 And  thereon  will  I  chiefly  meditate. And  hold  no  other  sect  but  such  devotion. Wilt  thou  not  look  ?  is  all  thy  love  o'erwhelmed  ? Wilt  thou  not  hear?  Avhat  malice  stops  thine  ears? Why  speaks  thou  not  ?  what  silence  ties  thy  tongue  ? Thou  hast  been  sighted  as  the  eagle  is. And  heard  as  quickly  as  the  fearful  hare, And  spoke  as  smoothly  as  an  orator, When  I  have  bid  thee  hear  or  see  or  speak, 56
Arden  of  Feversham  act  hi.  sc.  s
And  art  thou  sensible  in  none  of  these?  130
Weigh  all  thy  good  turns  with  this  little  fault,
And  I  deserve  not  Mosbie's  muddy  looks.
A  fence  of  trouble  is  not  thickened  still :
Be  clear  again,  I  '11  ne'er  more  trouble  thee. Mosbie.  O  no,  I  am  a  base  artificer  :
My  wings  are  feathered  for  a  lowly  flight.
Mosbie  ?  fie  !  no,  not  for  a  thousand  pound.
Make  love  to  you  "i  why,  'tis  unpardonable  ;
We  beggars  must  not  breathe  where  gentles  are. Alice.  Sweet  Mosbie  is  as  gentle  as  a  king,  140
And  I  too  blind  to  judge  him  otherwise.
Flowers  do  sometimes  spring  in  fallow  lands,
Weeds  in  gardens,  roses  grow  on  thorns  ;
So,  whatsoe'er  my  Mosbie's  father  was.
Himself  is  valued  gentle  by  his  worth. Mosbie.  Ah,  how  you  women  can  insinuate,
And  clear  a  trespass  with  your  sweet-set  tongue  !
I  will  forget  this  quarrel,  gentle  Alice,
Provided  I  '11  be  tempted  so  no  more.
Here  enters  Bradshaiv.
Alice.  Then  with  thy  lips  seal  up  this  new-made  match. Mosbie.  Soft,  Alice,  here  comes  somebody.  151
Alice.  How  now,  Bradshaw,  what 's  the  news  with  you? Bradshaiv.  I  have  little  news,  but  here  's  a  letter
That  Master  Greene  importuned  me  to  give  you.
ACT  III.  sc.  6.  Arden  of  Feversham
Alice.  Go  in,  Bradshaw  ;  call  for  a  cup  of  beer  ;
'Tis  almost  supper-time,  thou  shalt  stay  with  us.
[Exit  Bradshaw.
Then  she  reads  the  letter.
^  We  have  missed  of  our  purpose  at  London,  but  shall perform  it  by  the  way.  We  thank  our  neighbour Bradshaw. — Yours,  Richard  Greene.'
How  likes  my  love  the  tenor  of  this  letter  ?  i6o
Mosbie.  Well,  were  his  date  completed  and  expired. Alice.  Ah,   would  it   were  !      Then   comes  my  happy hour  : Till  then  my  bliss  is  mixed  with  bitter  gall. Come,  let  us  in  to  shun  suspicion. Mosbie.  Ay,  to  the  gates  of  death  to  follow  thee.   \Exeunt.
SCENE  VI Country  near  Rochester. Here  enters  Grccjte,  IVi//,  and  Shahebag.
Shakebag.  Come,  Will,  see  thy  tools  be  in  a  readiness  !
Is  not  thy  powder  dank,  or  will  thy  flint  strike  fire  ? Will.  Then  ask  me  if  my  nose  be  on  my  face,
Or  whether  my  tongue  be  frozen  in  my  mouth.
Zounds,  here's  a  coil !
You  were  best  swear  me  on  the  interrogatories 5^
Arden  of  Feversham  act  hi.  sc.  e.
How  many  pistols  I  have  took  In  hand,
Or  whether  I  love  the  smell  of  gunpowder,
Or  dare  abide  the  noise  the  dag  will  make,
Or  will  not  wink  at  flashing  of  the  fire.  lO
I  pray  thee,  Shakebag,  let  this  answer  thee,
That  I  have  took  more  purses  in  this  down
Than  e'er  thou  handledst  pistols  in  thy  life.
Shakebag.  Ay,  haply  thou  has  picked  more  in  a  throng: But,  should  I  brag  what  booties  I  have  took, I  think  the  overplus  that 's  more  than  thine Would  mount  to  a  greater  sum  of  money Then  either  thou  or  all  thy  kin  are  worth. Zounds,  I  hate  them  as  I  hate  a  toad That  carry  a  muscado  in  their  tongue,  20
And  scarce  a  hurting  weapon  in  their  hand.
Will.  O  Greene,  intolerable  !
It  is  not  for  mine  honour  to  bear  this.
Why,  Shakebag,  I  did  serve  the  king  at  Boulogne,
And  thou  canst  brag  of  nothing  that  thou  hast  done.
Shakebag.  Why,  so  can  Jack  of  Feversham, That  sounded  for  a  fillip  on  the  nose, When  he  that  gave  it  him  holloed  in  his  ear. And  he  supposed  a  cannon-bullet  hit  him.
Then  they  fight.
Greene.  I  pray  you,  sirs,  list  to  ^sop's  talk  :  30
Whilst  two  stout  dogs  were  striving  for  a  bone, There  comes  a  cur  and  stole  it  from  them  both  ;
ACT  III.  sc.  6.  Arden  of  Feversham
So,   while  you   stand   striving   on  these  terms    of
manhood, Arden  escapes  us,  and  deceives  us  all. Shakebag.  Why,  he  begun.
Will.  And  thou  shalt  find  I  '11  end  ;
I  do  but  slip  it  until  better  time  :
But,  if  I  do  forget  
\Then  he  kneels  down  and  holds  up his  hands  to  heaven. Greene.    Well,   take   your  fittest   standings,  and    once more Lime  well  your  twigs  to  catch  this  wary  bird. .    I  '11  leave  you,  and  at  your  dag's  discharge  40
Make  towards,  like  the  longing  water-dog That  coucheth  till  the  fowling-piece  be  off. Then  seizeth  on  the  prey  with  eager  mood. Ah,  might  I  see  him  stretching  forth  his  limbs. As  I  have  seen  them  beat  their  wings  ere  now  ! Shakebag.  Why,  that  thou  shalt  see,  if  he  come  this  way. Greene.  Yes,  that  he  doth,  Shakebag,  I  warrant  thee  : But  brawl  not  when  I  am  gone  in  any  case. But,  sirs,  be  sure  to  speed  him  when  he  comes, And  in  that  hope  I  '11  leave  you  for  an  hour.  50
{Exit  Greene.
Here  enters  Arden,  Franklin,  and  Michael.
Michael.  'Twere  best  that  I  went  back  to  Rochester  : The  horse  halts  downright ;  it  were  not  good 60
Arden  of  Feversham  act  hi.  sc.  e.
He  travelled  in  such  pain  to  Feversham  ; Removing  of  a  shoe  may  haply  help  it.
Arden.  Well,  get  you  back  to  Rochester  ;  but,  sirrah,  see Ye  o'ertake  us  ere  we  come  to  Rainham  Down, For  't  will  be  very  late  ere  we  get  home.
Michael.   Ay,  God  he  knows,  and   so   doth  Will  and Shakebag, That  thou  shalt  never  go  further  than  that  down  ; And  therefore  have  I  pricked  the  horse  on  purpose, Because  I  would  not  view  the  massacre.  6i
\_Exit  Michael.
Arden.  Come,  Master  Franklin,  onwards  with  your  tale.
Franklin.  I  do  assure  you,  sir,  you  task  me  much  : A  heavy  blood  is  gathered  at  my  heart, And  on  the  sudden  is  my  wind  so  short As  hindereth  the  passage  of  my  speech  ; So  fierce  a  qualm  yet  ne'er  assailed  me.
Arden.  Come,  Master  Franklin,  let  us  go  on  softly  : The  annoyance  of  the  dust  or  else  some  meat You  ate  at  dinner  cannot  brook  with  you.  70
I  have  been  often  so,  and  soon  amended.
Franklin.  Do  you  remember  where  my  tale  did  leave?
Arden.  Ay,  where  the  gentleman  did  check  his  wife.
Franklin.  She  being  reprehended  for  the  fact.
Witness  produced  that  took  her  with  the  deed, Her  glove  brought  in  which  there  she  left  behind. And  many  other  assured  arguments. Her  husband  asked  her  whether  it  were  not  so. 61
ACT  III.  sc.  6.  Arden  of  Feversham
Arden.  Her  answer  then?  I  wonder  how  she  looked, Having-  forsworn  it  with  such  vehement  oaths,       80 And  at  the  instant  so  approved  upon  her.
Franklin.  First  did  she  cast  her  eyes  down  to  the  earth, Watching  the  drops  that  fell  amain  from  thence ; Then  softly  draws  she  forth  her  handkercher, And  modestly  she  wipes  her  tear-stained  face  ; Them  hemmed  she  out,  to  clear  her  voice  should  seem, And  with  a  majesty  addressed  herself To  encounter  all  their  accusations. — Pardon  me,  Master  Arden,  I  can  no  more  ; This  fighting  at  my  heart  makes  short  my  wind.    90
Arden.  Come,  we  are  almost  now  at  Rainham  Down  : Your  pretty  tale  beguiles  the  v.eary  way  ; I  would  you  were  in  state  to  tell  it  out.
Shakebag.  Stand  close.  Will,  I  hear  them  coming,
He7'e  enters  Lord  Chemy  "juith  his  men.
Will.  Stand  to  it,  ShakelDag,  and  be  resolute. Z.  Cheiny.  Is  it  so  near  night  as  it  seems,
Or  will  this  black-faced  evening  have  a  shower?
— What,  Master  Arden  ?  you  are  well  met,
1   have  longed  this  fortnight's  day  to  speak  with
you  : You  are  a  stranger,  man,  in  the  Isle  of  Sheppy.    100 Arden.  Your  honour's  always  !  bound  to  do  you  service. L.  Cheiny.   Come  you  from  London,  and  ne'er  a  man with  you  ?
62
Arden  of  Feversham  act  hi.  sc.  e.
Arden,  My  man  's  coming  after,  but  here 's
My  honest  friend  that  came  along  with  me. Z.  Cheiny.  My  Lord  Protector's  man  I  take  you  to  be. Franklin.  Ay,  my  good  lord,  and  highly  bound  to  you. Z.  Cheiny.    You  and  your  friend  come  home  and  sup
with  me. Arden.  I  beseech  your  honour  pardon  me  ; I  have  made  a  promise  to  a  gentleman, My  honest  friend,  to  meet  him  at  my  house  ;       Iio The  occasion  is   great,  or  else  would    I    wait   on you. L.  Cheiny.  Will   you   come   to-morrow  and   dine   with me, And  bring  your  honest  friend  along  with  you .'' I  have  divers  matters  to  talk  with  you  about. Arden.  To-morrow  we'll  wait  upon  your  honour. L.  Cheiny.  One  of  you  stay  my  horse  at  the  top  of  the hill. — What  !  Black  Will  ?  for  whose  purse  wait  you  ? Thou  wilt  be  hanged  in  Kent,  when  all  is  done. Will.  Not  hanged,  God  save  your  honour  ;
I  am  your  bedesman,  bound  to  pray  for  you.         I20 L,  Cheiny.  I  think  thou  ne'er  said'st  prayer  in  all  thy life.— One  of  you  give  him  a  crown  :  — And,  sirrah,  leave  this  kind  of  life  ; If  thou  beest  tainted  for  a  penny-matter, And  come  in  question,  surely  thou  wilt  truss. 63
ACT  III.  sc.  6.  Arden  of  Feversham
— Come,  Master  Arden,  let  us  be  going  ;
Your  way  and  mine  lies  four  miles  together.
[Exezm^.     Ma7iet  Black  Will  and  Shakebag. Will.  The  devil  break  all  your  necks  at  four  miles'  end  !
Zounds,  I  could  kill  myself  for  very  anger  !
His  lordship  chops  me  in,  130
Even  when  my  dag  was  levelled  at  his  heart.
I  would  his  crown  were  molten  down  his  throat. Shakebag.  Arden,  thou  hast  wondrous  holy  luck.
Did  ever  man  escape  as  thou  hast  done?
Well,  I  '11  discharge  my  pistol  at  the  sky,
For  by  this  bullet  Arden  might  not  die.
Here  enters  Greene.
Greene.  What,  is  he  down?  is  he  dispatched?
Shakebag.  Ay,  in  health  towards  Feversham,  to  shame us  all.
Greene.  The  devil  he  is  !  why,  sirs,  how  escaped  he?
Shakebag.  When  we  were  ready  to  shoot,  140
Comes  my  Lord  Cheiny  to  prevent  his  death.
Greene.  The  Lord  of  Heaven  hath  preserved  him.
Will.  Preserved  a  fig  !       The  Lord  Cheiny  hath   pre- served him, And  bids  him  to  a  feast  to  his  house  at  Shorlow. But  by  the  way  once  more  I  '11  meet  with  him, And,  if  all  the  Cheinies  in  the  world  say  no, I  '11  have  a  bullet  in  his  breast  to-morrow. Therefore  come,  Greene,  and  let  us  to  Feversham. 64
Arden  of  Feversham  act  hi.  sc.  e.
Greene.  Ay,  and  excuse  ourselves  to  Mistress  Arden  :
O,  how  she  '11  chafe  when  she  hears  of  this  !  150
Shakebag.  Why,  I  '11  warrant  you  she  '11  think  we  dare
not  do  it. Will.  Why,  then  let  us  go,  and  tell  her  all  the  matter, And  plat  the  news  to  cut  him  off  to-morrow.
{Exeunt.
65
ACT  IV.  sc.  I.  Arden  of  Feversham
ACT   IV
SCENE  I
Af'den^s  Hoiiae  at  Fever shain.
Here  enters  Arden  and  his  wife,  Frank  lift,  and  Michael
Arden.    See   how  the  hours,   the  gardant  of  heaven's gate,
Have  by  their  toil  removed  the  darksome  clouds,
That  Sol  may  well  discern  the  trampled  path
Wherein  he  wont  to  guide  his  golden  car  ;
The  season  fits  ;  come,  Franklin,  let 's  away. Alice.  I  thought  you  did  pretend  some  special  hunt,
That  made  you  thus  cut  short  the  time  of  rest. Arden.  It  was  no  chase  that  made  me  rise  so  early,
But,  as  I  told  thee  yesternight,  to  go
To  the  Isle  of  Sheppy,  there  to  dine  with  my  Lord Cheiny ;  lo
For  so  his  honour  late  commanded  me. Alice.  Ay,  such  kind  husbands  seldom  want  excuses  ;
Home  is  a  wild  cat  to  a  wandering  wit.
7'he  time  hath  been, — would  God  it  were  not  past, — 66
Arden  of  Feversham  act  iv.  sc.  i.
That  honour's  title  nor  a  lord's  command
Could  once  have  drawn  you  from  these  arms  of
mine. But  my  deserts  or  your  desires  decay, Or  both  ;  yet  if  true  love  may  seem  desert, I  merit  still  to  have  thy  company.
Franklin.  Why,  I  pray  you,  sir,  let  her  go  along  with us ;  20
I  am  sure  his  honour  will  welcome  her And  us  the  more  for  bringing  her  along.
Arden.  Content  ;  sirrah,  saddle  your  mistress'  nag.
Alice.  No,  begged  favour  merits  little  thanks  ; If  I  should  go,  our  house  would  run  away. Or  else  be  stolen  ;  therefore  I  '11  stay  behind.
Arden.  Nay,  see  how  mistaking  you  are  !  I  pray  thee, go.
Alice.  No,  no,  not  now.
Arden.  Then  let  me  leave  thee  satisfied  in  this,
That  time  nor  place  nor  persons  alter  me,  30
But  that  I  hold  thee  dearer  than  my  life.
Alice.  That  will  be  seen  by  your  quick  return.
Arden.  And  that  shall  be  ere  night,  and  if  I  live.
Farewell,  sweet  Alice,  we  mind  to  sup  with  thee.
\Exit  Alice.
Franklin.  Come,  Michael,  are  our  horses  ready  ?
Michael.  Ay,  your  horse  are  ready,  but  I  am  not  ready, for   I    have  lost   my  purse,    with    six    and   thirty shillings  in  it,  with  taking  up  of  my  master's  nag. F  67
ACT  IV.  sc.  X.  Arden  of  Feversham
Franklin.  Why,  I  pray  you,  let  us  go  before,
Whilst  he  stays  behind  to  seek  his  purse.  40
Arden.  Go  to,  sirrah,  see  you  follow  us  to  the  Isle  of Sheppy
To  my  Lord  Cheiny's,  where  we  mean  to  dine.
\Exeunt  Arden  and  Franklin.     Manet  Michael. Michael.  So,  fair  weather  after  you,  for  before  you  lies
Black  Will  and  Shakebag  in  the  broom  close,  too
close  for  you  :    they  '11  be  your  ferrymen  to  long
home.
Here  enters  the  Painter.
But  who   is   this  ?   the   painter,   my   corrival,   that
would  needs  win  Mistress  Susan. Clarke.  How  now,  Michael?  how  doth  my  mistress  and
all  at  home  ? Michael.  Who?   Susan  Mosbie?   she  is  your  mistress,
too  ?  50
Clarke.  Ay,  how  doth  she  and  all  the  rest  ? Michael.  All 's  well  but  Susan  ;  she  is  sick. Clarke.  Sick?     Of  what  disease? Michael.  Of  a  great  fever. Clarke.  A  fear  of  what  ? Michael.  A  great  fever, Clarke.  A  fever?     God  forbid  I Michael.  Yes,  faith,  and  of  a  lordaine,  too,  as  big  as
yourself. Clarke.  O,  Michael,  the   spleen  prickles  you.      Go  to,
you  carry  an  eye  over  Mistress  Susan.  60
68
Arden  of  Feversham  act  iv.  sc.  i.
Michael.  I' faith,  to  keep  her  from  the  painter.
Clarke.  Why  more  from  a  painter  than  from  a  serving creature  like  yourself?
Michael.  Because  you  painters  make  but  a  painting table  of  a  pretty  wench,  and  spoil  her  beauty  with blotting.
Clarke.  What  mean  you  by  that  ?
Michael.  Why,  that  you  painters  paint  lambs  in  the  lin- ing of  wenches'  petticoats,  and  we  serving-men  put horns  to  them  to  make  them  become  sheep.  70
Clarke.  Such  another  word  will  cost  you  a  cuff  or  a knock.
Michael.  What,  with  a  dagger  made  of  a  pencil  ?  Faith, 'tis  too  weak,  and  therefore  thou  too  weak  to  win Susan.
Clarke.  Would  Susan's  love  lay  upon  this  stroke.
{Then  he  breaks  MichaePs  head.
Here  enters  Mosbie^  Greene ^  and  Alice.
Alice.  I  '11  lay  my  life,  this  is  for  Susan's  love. Stayed  you  behind  your  master  to  this  end  ? Have  you  no  other  time  to  brable  in But  now  when  serious  matters  are  in  hand  ? — Say,  Clarke,  hast  thou  done  the  thing  thou  pro- mised .?  80 Clarke.  Ay,  here  it  is  ;  the  very  touch  is  death Alice.  Then  this,  I  hope,  if  all  the  rest  do  fail, Will  catch  Master  Arden, 69
ACT  IV.  sc.  I.  Arden  of  Feversham
And  make  him  wise  in  death  that  lived  a  fool. Why  should  he  thrust  his  sickle  in  our  com, Or  what  hath  he  to  do  with  thee,  my  love, Or  govern  me  that  am  to  rule  myself? Forsooth,  for  credit  sake,  I  must  leave  thee  I Nay,  he  must  leave  to  live  that  we  may  love. May  live,  may  love  ;  for  what  is  life  but  love  ?       90 And  love  shall  last  as  long  as  life  remains, And  life  shall  end  before  my  love  depart.
Mosbie.  Why,  what  is  love  without  true  constancy  ? Like  to  a  pillar  built  of  many  stones. Yet  neither  with  good  mortar  well  compact Nor  with  cement  to  fasten  it  in  the  joints, But  that  it  shakes  with  every  blast  of  wind, And,  being  touched,  straight  falls  unto  the  earth, And  buries  all  his  haughty  pride  in  dust. No,  let  our  love  be  rocks  of  adamant,  100
Which  time  nor  place  nor  tempest  can  asunder.
Gree7ie.  Mosbie,  leave  protestations  now,
And  let  us  bethink  us  what  we  have  to  do.
Black  Will  and   Shakebag   I  have   placed   i'  the
broom, Close  watching  Arden's  coming  ;  let's  to  them And  see  what  they  have  done.  \Exeunt,
70
Arden  of  Feversham  act  iv.  sc.  a.
SCENE  II The  Kentish  Coast  opposite  the  Isle  of  Sheppy. Here  enters  Arden  and  Franklin. Arden.  Oh,  ferryman,  where  art  thou  ?
Here  enters  the  Ferryman.
Ferryman,  Here,  here,  go  before  to  the  boat,  and  I  will follow  you.
Arden.  We  have  great  haste  ;  I  pray  thee,  come  away.
Ferry?nan.  Fie,  what  a  mist  is  here  !
Arden.  This  mist,  my  friend,  is  mystical.
Like  to  a  good  companion's  smoky  brain, That  was  half  drowned  with  new  ale  overnight.
Ferryman.  'Twere  pity  but  his  skull  were  opened  to make  more  chimney  room.  lo
Franklin.  Friend,  what 's  thy  opinion  of  this  mist?
Ferryman.  I  think  'tis  like  to  a  curst  wife  in  a  little house,  that  never  leaves  her  husband  till  she  have driven  him  out  at  doors  with  a  wet  pair  of  eyes  ; then  looks  he  as  if  his  house  were  a-fire,  or  some  of his  friends  dead.
Arden.  Speaks  thou  this  of  thine  own  experience?
Ferryjnan.  Perhaps,  ay  ;  perhaps,  no  :  For  my  wife  is as  other  women  are,  that  is  to  say,  governed  by  the moon.  20
71
ACT  IV.  sc.  3.  Arden  of  Feversham
Franklin.  By  the  moon  ?  how,  I  pray  thee  ? Ferry7nan.  Nay,  thereby  lies  a  bargain,  and  you  shali
not  have  it  fresh  and  fasting. Arden.  Yes,  I  pray  thee,  good  ferryman. Ferryman.  Then  for  this  once ;   let  it  be  midsummer
moon,  but  yet  my  wife  has  another  moon. Franklin.  Another  moon .?
Ferryman.  Ay,  and  it  hath  influences  and  eclipses. Arden.   Why,  then,  by  this  reckoning  you  sometimes
play  the  man  in  the  moon  ?  30
Ferryman.  Ay,  but  you  had  not  best  to  meddle  with
that  moon,  lest  I  scratch  you  by  the  face  with  my
bramble -bush. Arden.   I  am  almost  stifled  with  this  fog;  come,  let's
away. Franklin.  And,  sirrah,  as  we  go,  let  us  have  some  more
of  your  bold  yeomanry. Ferryman.  Nay,  by  my  troth,  sir,  but  flat  knavery.
\Exeunt.
SCENE    III
Another  place  on  the  coast.
Here  enters  Will  at  one  door^  and  Shakebag  at  another.
Shakebag.  Oh,  Will,  where  art  thou  ? Will.  Here,  Shakebag,  almost  in  hell's  mouth,  where  I cannot  see  my  way  for  smoke. 72
Arden  of  Feversham  act  iv.  sc.  3.
Shakebag.  I  pray  thee  speak  still  that  we  may  meet  by the  sound,  for  I  shall  fall  into  some  ditch  or  other, unless  my  feet  see  better  than  my  eyes.
Will.  Didst  thou  ever  see  better  weather  to  run  away with  another  man's  wife,  or  play  with  a  wench  at pot-finger?  9
Shakebag.  No  ;  this  were  a  fine  world  for  chandlers,  if this  weather  would  last ;  for  then  a  man  should never  dine  nor  sup  without  candle-light.  But, sirrah  Will,  what  horses  are  those  that  passed  ?
Will.  Why,  didst  thou  hear  any  ?
Shakebag.  Ay,  that  I  did.
Will.  My  life  for  thine,  'twas  Arden,  and  his  companion, and  then  all  our  labour's  lost.
Shakebag.  Nay,  say  not  so,  for  if  it  be  they,  they  may haply  lose  their  way  as  we  have  done,  and  then  we may  chance  meet  with  them.  20
Will.  Come,  let  us  go  on  like  a  couple  of  blind  pil- grims.
[  Then  Shakebag  falls  into  a  ditch.
Shakebag.  Help,  Will,  help,  I  am  almost  drowned.
Here  enters  the  Ferryman.
Ferryman.  Who  's  that  that  calls  for  help  ? Will.  'Twas  none  here,  'twas  thou  thyself. Ferryman.  I  came  to  help  him  that  called  for  help. Why,  how  now  ?  who  is  this  that 's  in  the  ditch  ? 73
ACT  IV.  sc.  3.  Arden  of  Feversham
You  are  well  enough  served  to  go  without  a  guide
such  weather  as  this. Wz7/.  Sirrah,  what  companies  hath   passed  your  ferry
this  morning  ?  30
Ferryman.  None  but  a  couple  of  gentlemen,  that  went
to  dine  at  my  Lord  Cheiny's. PVi7l  Shakebag,  did  not  I  tell  thee  as  much .'' Ferryvian,  Why,  sir,  will  you  have  any  letters  carried
to  them  ? Will.  No,  sir  ;  get  you  gone. Ferryrnan.  Did  you  ever  see  such  a  mist  as  this  ? Will.  No,  nor  such  a  fool  as  will  rather  be  bought  than
get  his  way. Ferryman.  Why,  sir,  this  is  no  Hough- Monday  ;  you
are  deceived. — What 's  his  name,  I  pray  you,  sir  ?  41 Shakebag.  His  name  is  Black  Will. Ferrytnan.  I  hope  to  see  him  one  day  hanged  upon  a
hill.  [^Exit  Ferryman.
Shakebag.  See  how  the  sun  hath  cleared  the  foggy  mist,
Now  we  have  missed  the  mark  of  our  intent.
Here  enters  Greene^  Mosbie^  and  Alice.
Mosbie.    Black   Will   and   Shakebag,   what  make  you here? What,  is  the  deed  done  ?  is  Arden  dead  ? Will.  What  could  a  blinded  man  perform  in  arms  ?
Saw  you  not  how  till  now  the  sky  was  dark,  50
74
Arden  of  Feversham  act  iv.  sc.  3-
That  neither  horse  nor  man  could  be  discerned  ? Yet  did  we  hear  their  horses  as  they  passed.
Greene.  Have  they  escaped  you,  then,  and  passed  the ferry?
Shakebag.  Ay,  for  a  while  ;  but  here  we  two  will  stay, And  at  their  coming  back  meet  with  them  once
more. Zounds,  I  was  ne'er  so  toiled  in  all  my  Ufe In  following  so  slight  a  task  as  this.
Mosbie.  How  cam'st  thou  so  berayed  .'*
Will.  With  making  false  footing  in  the  dark  ;
He  needs  would  follow  them  without  a  guide.        60
Alice.  Here  's  to  pay  for  a  fire  and  good  cheer  : Get  you  to  Feversham  to  the  Flower-de-luce, And  rest  yourselves  until  some  other  time,
Greene.  Let  me  alone  ;  it  most  concerns  my  state.
Will.  Ay,  Mistress  Arden,  this  will  serve  the  turn, In  case  we  fall  into  a  second  fog.
[Exeunt  Greene^  Will.,  and  Shakebag.
Mosbie.  These  knaves  will  never  do  it,  let  us  give  it over.
Alice.  First  tell  me  how  you  like  my  new  device  : Soon,  when  my  husband  is  returning  back. You  and  I  both  marching  arm  in  arm,  70
Like  loving  friends,  we  '11  meet  him  on  the  way, And  boldly  beard  and  brave  him  to  his  teeth. When  words  grow  hot  and  blows  begin  to  rise, I  '11  call  those  cutters  forth  your  tenement, 75
ACT  IV.  sc.  4.  Arden  of  Feversham
Who,  in  a  manner  to  take  up  the  fray, Shall  wound  my  husband  Hornsby  to  the  death. Mosbie.  A  fine  device  !  why,  this  deserves  a  kiss.
\Exeiint.
SCENE   IV
The  open  country.
Here  enters  Dick  Reede  and  a  Sailor.
Sailor.  Faith,  Dick  Reede,  it  is  to  little  end  :
His  conscience  is  too  liberal,  and  he  too  niggardly To  part  from  any  thing  may  do  thee  good.
Reede.  He  is  coming  from  Shorlow  as  I  understand  ; Here  I  '11  intercept  him,  for  at  his  house He  never  will  vouchsafe  to  speak  with  me. If  prayers  and  fair  entreaties  will  not  serve, Or  make  no  battery  in  his  flinty  breast,
Here  enters  Franklin^  Arden ^  and  Michael.
I  '11  curse  the  carle,  and  see  what  that  will  do. See  where  he  comes  to  further  my  intent ! —  10
Master  Arden,  I  am  now  bound  to  the  sea  ; My  coming  to  you  was  about  the  plat Of  ground  which  wrongfully  you  detain  from  me. Although  the  rent  of  it  be  very  small. Yet  it  will  help  my  wife  and  children, 76
Arden  of  Feversham  act  iv.  sc.  4.
Which  here  I  leave  in  Feversham,  God  knows, Needy    and    bare :    for    Christ's    sake,    let    them have  it  !
Arden.  Franklin,  hearest  thou  this  fellow  speak  ? That  which  he  craves  I  dearly  bought  of  him, Although  the  rent  of  it  was  ever  mine. —  20
Sirrah,  you  that  ask  these  questions. If  with  thy  clamorous  impeaching  tongue Thou  rail  on  me,  as  I  have  heard  thou  dost, I  '11  lay  thee  up  so  close  a  twelve-month's  day, As  thou  shalt  neither  see  the  sun  nor  moon. Look  to  it,  for,  as  surely  as  I  live, 1  '11  banish  pity  if  thou  use  me  thus.
Reede.   What,  wilt  thou   do  me  wrong  and  threat   me too. Nay,  then,  I  '11  tempt  thee,  Arden,  do  thy  worst. God,  I  beseech  thee,  show  some  miracle  30
On  thee  or  thine,  in  plaguing  thee  for  this. That  plot  of  ground  which  thou  detains  from  me, I  speak  it  in  an  agony  of  spirit. Be  ruinous  and  fatal  unto  thee  ! Either  there  be  butchered  by  thy  dearest  friends, Or  else  be  brought  for  men  to  wonder  at. Or  thou  or  thine  miscarry  in  that  place. Or  there  nm  mad  and  end  thy  cursed  days  !
Franklin.  Fie,  bitter  knave,  bridle  thine  envious  tongue  ; For  curses  are  like  arrows  shot  upright,  40
Which  falling  down  light  on  the  shooter's  head.
n
ACT  IV.  sc.  4.  Arden  of  Feversham
Reede.  Light  where  they  will !     Were  I  upon  the  sea, As  oft  I  have  in  many  a  bitter  storm, And  saw  a  dreadful  southern  flaw  at  hand, The  pilot  quaking  at  the  doubtful  storm, And  all  the  sailors  praying  on  their  knees, Even  in  that  fearful  time  would  I  fall  down, And  ask  of  God,  whate'er  betide  of  me, Vengeance  on  Arden  or  some  misevent To  show  the  world  what  wrong  the  carle  hath  done. This  charge  I  '11  leave  with  my  distressful  wife,      5 1 My  children  shall  be  taught  such  prayers  as  these  ; And  thus  I  go,  but  leave  my  curse  with  thee.
{Exeunt  Reede  and  Sailor.
Arden.  It  is  the  railingest  knave  in  Christendom, And  oftentimes  the  villain  will  be  mad  ; It  greatly  matters  not  what  he  says. But  I  assure  you  I  ne'er  did  him  wrong.
Franklin.  I  think  so,  Master  Arden.
Arden.  Now  that  our  horses  are  gone  home  before.
My  wife  may  haply  meet  me  on  the  way.  60
For  God  knows  she  is  grown  passing  kind  of  late. And  greatly  changed  from The  old  humour  of  her  wonted  frowardness. And  seeks  by  fair  means  to  redeem  old  faults.
Franklin.  Happy  the  change  that  alters  for  the  best  I But  see  in  any  case  you  make  no  speech Of  the  cheer  we  had  at  my  Lord  Cheiny's, Although  most  bounteous  and  liberal, 78
Arden  of  Feversham  act  iv.  sc.  4.
For  that  will  make  her  think  herself  more  wronged, In  that  we  did  not  carry  her  along  ;  70
For  sure  she  grieved  that  she  was  left  behind. Arden.  Come,  Franklin,  let  us  strain  to  mend  our  pace, And  take  her  unawares  playing  the  cook  ;
Here  enters  Alice  and  Mosbie.
For  I  believe  she'll  strive  to  mend  our  cheer. Franklin.  Why,  there 's  no  better  creatures  in  the  world,
Than  women  are  when  they  are  in  good  humours. Arden.  Who  is  that?     Mosbie?  what,  so  familiar?
Injurious  strumpet,  and  thou  ribald  knave,
Untwine  those  arms. Alice.  Ay,  with  a  sugared  kiss  let  them  untwine.  80
Arden.  Ah,  Mosbie  !  perjured  beast !  bear  this  and  all  ! Mosbie.  And  yet  no  horned  beast ;  the  horns  are  thine. Franklin.  O  monstrous  !     Nay,  then  it  is  time  to  draw. Alice.  Help,  help  !  they  murder  my  husband.
Here  enters  Will  and  Shakebag.
Shakebag.  Zounds,  who  injures  Master  Mosbie  ?     Help,
Will !  I  am  hurt. Mosbie.    I    may  thank   you.    Mistress   Arden,  for  this wound.
\^Exeunt  Mosbie.,  Will.,  and  Shakebag. Alice.  Ah,  Arden,  what  folly  blinded  thee  ?
Ah,  jealous  harebrained  man,  what  hast  thou  done  ! When  we,  to  welcome  thee  with  intended  sport, 79
ACT  IV.  sc.  4-  Arden  of  Feversham
Came  lovingly  to  meet  thee  on  thy  way,  90
Thou  drew^st  thy  sword,  enraged  with  jealousy,
And  hurt  thy  friend  whose  thoughts  were  free  from harm  :
All  for  a  worthless  kiss  and  joining  arms,
Both  done  but  merrily  to  try  thy  patience.
And  me  unhappy  that  devised  the  jest,
Which,  though  begun  in  sport,  yet  ends  in  blood  ! Franklin.  Marry,  God  defend  me  from  such  a  jest ! Alice.  Could'st  thou  not  see  us  friendly  smile  on  thee.
When    we  joined    arms,   and  when    I    kissed  his cheek  ?
Hast  thou  not  lately  found  me  over-kind?  100
Did'st  thou  not  hear  me  cry  'they  murder  thee'?
Called  1  not  help  to  set  my  husband  free  ?
No,  ears  and  all  were  witched  ;  ah  me  accursed
To  link  in  liking  with  a  frantic  man  !
Henceforth  I  '11  be  thy  slave,  no  more  thy  wife.
For  with  that  name  I  never  shall  content  thee.
If  I  be  merry,  thou  straightways  thinks  me  light ;
If  sad,  thou  sayest  the  sullens  trouble  me  ;
If  well  attired,  thou  thinks  I  will  be  gadding ;
If  homely,  I  seem  sluttish  in  thine  eye  :  no
Thus  am  I  still,  and  shall  be  while  I  die.
Poor  wench  abused  by  thy  misgovernment  ! Arden.  But  is  it  for  truth  that  neither  thou  nor  he
Intendedst  malice  in  your  misdemeanour? Alice.  The  heavens  can  witness  of  our  harmless  thoughts 80
Arden  of  Feversham  act  iv.  sc.  4.
Arden.  Then  pardon  me,  sweet  Alice,  and  forgive  this fault  1 Forget  but  this  and  never  see  the  like. Impose  me  penance,  and  I  will  perform  it, For  in  thy  discontent  I  find  a  death, — A  death  tormenting  more  than  death  itself  120
Alice.  Nay,  had'st  thou  loved  me  as  thou  dost  pretend, Thou  wouldst  have  marked  the  speeches  of  thy  friend, Who  going  wounded  from  the  place,  he  said His  skin  was  pierced  only  through  my  device  ; And  if  sad  sorrow  taint  thee  for  this  fault. Thou  would'st  have  followed  him,  and  seen  him
dressed. And  cried  him  mercy  whom  thou  hast  misdone  : Ne'er  shall  my  heart  be  eased  till  this  be  done. Arden.  Content  thee,  sweet  Alice,  thou  shalt  have  thy will, Whate'er  it  be.     For  that  I  injured  thee,  130
And  wronged    my  friend,    shame    scourgeth    my
offence ; Come  thou  thyself,  and  go  along  with  me, And  be  a  mediator  'twixt  us  two. Franklin.  Why,  Master  Arden  !  know  you  what  you  do?
Will  you  follow  him  that  hath  dishonoured  you  ? Alice.  Why,  canst  thou  prove  I  have  been  disloyal  ? Franklin.  Why,  Mosbie  taunted  your  husband  with  the
horn. Alice.  Ay,  after  he  had  reviled  him 81
ACT  IV.  sc.  4.  Arden  of  Feversham
By  the  injurious  name  of  perjured  beast :
He  knew  no  wrong  could  spite  a  jealous  man       140
More  than  the  hateful  naming  of  the  horn.
Franklin.  Suppose  'tis  true  ;  yet  is  it  dangerous To  follow  him  whom  he  hath  lately  hurt.
Alice.  A  fault  confessed  is  more  than  half  amends  ; But  men  of  such  ill  spirit  as  yourself Work  crosses  and  debates  'twixt  man  and  wife.
Arden.  I  pray  thee,  gentle  Franklin,  hold  thy  peace  : I  know  my  wife  counsels  me  for  the  best. I  '11  seek  out  Mosbie  where  his  wound  is  dressed, And  salve  this  hapless  quarrel  if  I  may.  1 50
[Exeunt  Arden  and  Alice.
Franklin.  He  whom  the  devil  drives  must  go  perforce. Poor  gentleman,  how  soon  he  is  bewitched  ! And  yet,  because  his  wife  is  the  instrument. His  friends  must  not  be  lavish  in  their  speech.
\Exit  Franklin.
82
Arden  of  Feversham  act  v.  sc.  x.
ACT  V
SCENE   I
A  Street  in  Fevcrshatn,
Here  enters  Will,  Shakebag^  and  Greene.
Will.  Sirrah  Greene,  when  was  I  so  long  in  killing  a  man?
Greene.  I  think  we  shall  never  do  it ;  let  us  give  it  over.
Shakebag.  Nay,  Zounds  !  we  '11  kill  him,  though  we  be hanged  at  his  door  for  our  labour.
Will.  Thou  knowest,  Greene,  that  I  have  lived  in  Lon- don this  twelve  years,  where  I  have  made  some  go upon  wooden  legs  for  taking  the  wall  on  me  ;  divers with  silver  noses  for  saying  'There  goes  Black  Will !' I  have  cracked  as  many  blades  as  thou  hast  nuts.
Greene.  O  monstrous  lie  !  lo
Will.  Faith,  in  a  manner  I  have.  The  bawdy-houses have  paid  me  tribute  ;  there  durst  not  a  whore  set up,  unless  she  have  agreed  with  me  first  for  opening her  shop-windows.  For  a  cross  word  of  a  tapster I  have  pierced  one  barrel  after  another  with  my dagger,  and  held  him  by  the  ears  till  all  his  beer G  83
ACT  V.  sc.  I.  Arden  of  Feversham
hath  run  out.  In  Thames  Street  a  brewer's  cart was  like  to  have  run  over  me  :  I  made  no  more  ado, but  went  to  the  clerk  and  cut  all  the  notches  of  his tallies  and  beat  them  about  his  head.  I  and  my company  have  taken  the  constable  from  his  watch, and  carried  him  about  the  fields  on  a  coltstafF.  I have  broken  a  sergeant's  head  with  his  own  mace, and  bailed  whom  I  list  with  my  sword  and  buckler. All  the  tenpenny-alehouses-men  would  stand  every morning  with  a  quart-pot  in  their  hand,  saying, 'Will  it  please  your  worship  drink?'  He  that  had not  done  so,  had  been  sure  to  have  had  his  sign pulled  down  and  his  lattice  borne  away  the  next night.  To  conclude,  what  have  I  not  done?  yet cannot  do  this ;  doubtless,  he  is  preserved  by miracle.  32
Here  enters  Alice  and  Michael.
Greene.  Hence,  Will !  here  comes  Mistress  Arden.
Alice.  Ah,  gentle  Michael,  art  thou  sure  they  're  friends  ?
Michael.  Why,  I  saw  them  when  they  both  shook  hands. When  Mosbie  bled,  he  even  wept  for  sorrow, And  railed  on  Franklin  that  was  cause  of  all. No  sooner  came  the  surgeon  in  at  doors. But  my  master  took  to  his  purse  and  gave  him
money, And,  to  conclude,  sent  me  to  bring  you  word         40 That  Mosbie,  Franklin,  Bradshaw,  Adam  Fowle, 84
Arden  of  Feversham  act  v.  sc.  j.
With  divers  of  his  neighbours  and  his  friends, Will  come  and  sup  with  you  at  our  house  this  night. Alice.  Ah,  gentle  Michael,  run  thou  back  again, And,  when  my  husband  walks  into  the  fair, Bid  Mosbie  steal  from  him  and  come  to  me ; And  this  night  shall  thou  and  Susan  be  made  sure. Michael.  I  '11  go  tell  him.
Alice.  And  as  thou  goest,  tell  John  cook  of  our  guests, And  bid  him  lay  it  on,  spare  for  no  cost.  50
\Exit  Michael. Will.   Nay,  and  there  be  such  cheer,  we  will  bid  our- selves.— Mistress   Arden,  Dick  Greene  and  I   do  mean  to sup  with  you. Alice.  And  welcome  shall  you  be.     Ah,  gentlemen, How  missed  you  of  your  purpose  yesternight  ? Greene.  'Twas  'long  of  Shakebag,  that  unlucky  villain. Shakcbag.  Thou  dost  me  wrong;    I    did   as  much  as
any. Will.  Nay  then.  Mistress  Arden,  I'll  tell  you  how  it was  : When  he  should  have  locked  with  both  his  hilts, He  in  a  bravery  flourished  o'er  his  head  ; With  that  comes  Franklin  at  him  lustily,  60
And  hurts  the  slave  ;  with  that  he  slinks  away. Now  his  way  had  been  to  have  come  hand  and  feet, one  and  two  round,  at  his  costard ;  he  like  a  fool bears  his  sword-point  half  a  yard  out  of  danger. 85
ACT  V.  sc.  I.  Arden  of  Feversham
I  lie  here  for  my  life  ;  if  the  devil  come,  and  he have  no  more  strength  than  I  have  fence,  he  shall never  beat  me  from  this  ward,  I  '11  stand  to  it  ;  a buckler  in  a  skilful  hand  is  as  good  as  a  castle  ; nay,  'tis  better  than  a  sconce,  for  I  have  tried  it.  70 Mosbie,  perceiving  this,  began  to  faint : With  that  comes  Arden  with  his  arming  sword, And  thrust  him  through  the  shoulder  in  a  trice.
Alice.  Ay,  but  I  wonder  why  you  both  stood  still.
Will.  Faith,  I  was  so  amazed,  I  could  not  strike.
Alice.  Ah,  sirs,  had  he  yesternight  been  slain, For  every  drop  of  his  detested  blood I  would  have  crammed  in  angels  in  thy  fist. And  kissed  thee,  too,  and  hugged  thee  in  my  arms.
Will.  Patient  yourself,  we  cannot  help  it  now.  80
Greene  and  we  two  will  dog  him  through  the  fair, And  stab  him  in  the  crowd,  and  steal  away.
Here  enters  Mosbie.
Alice.  It  is  unpossible  ;  but  here  comes  he
That  will,  I  hope,  invent  some  surer  means. Sweet  Mosbie,  hide  thy  arm,  it  kills  my  heart.
"Mosbie.  Ay,  Mistress  Arden,  this  is  your  favour.
Alice.  Ah,  say  not  so  ;  for  when  I  saw  thee  hurt, I  could  have  took  the  weapon  thou  let'st  fall, And  run  at  Arden  ;  for  I  have  sworn That  these  mine  eyes,  offended  with  his  sight,       90 Shall  never  close  till  Arden's  be  shut  up. 86
Arden  of  Feversham  act  v.  sc.  i.
This  night  I  rose  and  walked  about  the  chamber,
And  twice  or  thrice  I   thought  to  have  murdered him. Mosbie.  What,  in  the  night  ?  then  had  we  been  undone. Alice.  Why, how  long  shall  he  live? Mosbie.  Faith,  Alice,  no  longer  than  this  night. —
Black  Will  and  Shakebag,  will  you  two  perform
The  complot  that  I  have  laid  ? Will.  Ay,  or  else  think  me  a  villain. Greene.  And  rather  than  you  shall  want,  I  '11  help  myself. Mosbie.  You,  Master  Greene,  shall  single  Franklin  forth,
And  hold  him  with  a  long  tale  of  strange  news,   102
That  he  may  not  come  home  till  supper-time.
I  '11  fetch  Master  Arden  home,  and  we  like  friends
Will  play  a  game  or  two  at  tables  here. Alice.  But  what  of  all  this  ?  how  shall  he  be  slain? Mosbie.  Why,  Black  Will  and  Shakebag  locked  within the  counting-house
Shall  at  a  certain  watchword  given  rush  forth. Will.  What  shall  the  watchword  be  ? Mosbie.  '  Now  I  take  you ' ;  that  shall  be  the  word  :    no
But  come  not  forth  before  in  any  case. Will.  I  warrant  you.     But  who  shall  lock  me  in  ? Alice.  That  will  I  do  ;  thou'st  keep  the  key  thyself Mosbie.  Come,  Master  Greene,  go  you  along  with  me.
See  all  things  ready,  Alice,  against  we  come. Alice.  Take  no  care  for  that ;  send  you  him  home.
{Exeunt  Mosbie  and  Greene. 87
ACT  V.  sc.  1.  Arden  of  Feversham
And  if  he  e'er  go  forth  again,  blame  me.
Come,  Black  Will,  that  in  mine  eyes  art  fair  ;
Next  unto  Mosbie  do  I  honour  thee ;
Instead  of  fair  words  and  large  promises  120
My  hands  shall  play  you  golden  harmony  :
How  like  you  this  ?  say,  will  you  do  it,  sirs  ?
Wi7/.  Ay,  and  that  bravely,  too.     Mark  my  device  : Place  Mosbie,  being  a  stranger,  in  a  chair. And  let  your  husband  sit  upon  a  stool. That  I  may  come  behind  him  cunningly. And  with  a  towel  pull  him  to  the  ground, Then  stab  him  till  his  flesh  be  as  a  sieve  ; That  done,  bear  him  behind  the  Abbey, That  those  that  find  him  murdered  may  suppose  130 Some  slave  or  other  killed  him  for  his  gold.
Alice.  A  fine  device  !  you  shall  have  twenty  pound, And,  when  he  is  dead,  you  shall  have  forty  more. And,  lest  you  might  be  suspected  staying  here, Michael  shall  saddle  you  two  lusty  geldings  ; Ride  whither  you  will,  to  Scotland,  or  to  Wales, I  '11  see  you  shall  not  lack,  where'er  you  be.
Will.   Such  words   would   make   one   kill  a  thousand men  ! Give  me  the  key  :  which  is  the  counting-house  ?
Alice.  Here  would  I  stay  and  still  encourage  you  ;     140 But  that  I  know  how  resolute  you  are.
Shakebag.   Tush,  you  are  too  faint-hearted;    we  must do  it.
88
Arden  of  Feversham  act  v.  sc.  i.
Alice.  But  Mosbie  will  be  there,  whose  very  looks Will  add  unwonted  courage  to  my  thought, And  make  me  the  first  that  shall  adventure  on  him.
Will.  Tush,  get  you  gone  ;  'tis  we  must  do  the  deed. When  this  door  opens  next,  look  for  his  death.
\Exeunt  Will  and  Shakebag.
Alice.  Ah,  would  he  now  were  here  that  it  might  open  ! I  shall  no  more  be  closed  in  Arden's  arms, That  like  the  snakes  of  black  Tisiphone  150
Sting  me  with  their  embracings  !     Mosbie's  arms Shall  compass  me,  and,  were  I  made  a  star, I  would  have  none  other  spheres  but  those. There  is  no  nectar  but  in  Mosbie's  lips  ! Had  chaste  Diana  kissed  him,  she  like  me Would  grow  love-sick,  and  from  her  watery  bower Fling  down  Endymion  and  snatch  him  up  : Then  blame  not  me  that  slay  a  silly  man Not  half  so  lovely  as  Endymion.
Here  enters  Michael.
Michael.  Mistress,  my  master  is  coming  hard  by.       160
Alice.  Who  comes  with  him  ?
Michael.  Nobody  but  Mosbie.
Alice.  That's  well,  Michael.  Fetch  in  the  tables,  and when  thou  hast  done,  stand  before  the  counting- house  door.
Michael.  Why  so  ?
Alice.  Black  Will  is  locked  within  to  do  the  deed. 89
ACT  V.  sc.  r.  Arden  of  Feversham
Michael.  What  ?  shall  he  die  to-night  ?
Alice.  Ay,  Michael.
Michael.  But  shall  not  Susan  know  it  ?
Alice.  Yes,  for  she'll  be  as  secret  as  ourselves.  170
Michael.  That 's  brave.     I  '11  go  fetch  the  tables.
Alice.  But,  Michael,  hark  to  me  a  word  or  two  :
When  my  husband  is  come  in,  lock  the  street-door ;
He  shall  be  murdered,  or  the  guests  come  in.
\Exit  Michael.
Here  enters  Arden  and  Mosbie.
Husband,  what  mean  you  to  bring  Mosbie  home  ? Although  I  wished  you  to  be  reconciled, 'Twas  more  for  fear  of  you  than  love  of  him. Black  Will  and  Greene  are  his  companions, And  they  are  cutters,  and  may  cut  you  short : Therefore  I  thought  it  good  to  make  you  friends.  180 But  wherefore  do  you  bring  him  hither  now? You  have  given  me  my  supper  with  his  sight.
Mosbie.  Master  Arden,  methinks  your  wife  would  have me  gone.
Arden.  No,  good  Master  Mosbie  ;  women  will  be  prating. Alice,  bid  him  welcome  ;  he  and  I  are  friends.
Alice.  You  may  enforce  me  to  it,  if  you  will ; But  I  had  rather  die  than  bid  him  welcome. His  company  hath  purchased  me  ill  friends, And  therefore  will  I  ne'er  frequent  it  more.
Mosbie.  — Oh,  how  cunningly  she  can  dissemble  !       190 90
Arden  of  Feversham  act  v.  sc.  i.
Arden.  Now  he  is  here,  you  will  not  serve  me  so. Alice,  I  pray  you  be  not  angry  or  displeased  ;
I  '11  bid  him  welcome,  seeing  you  '11  have  it  so.
You  are  welcome.  Master  Mosbie ;  will  you  sit  down? Mosbie.  I  know  I  am  welcome  to  your  loving  husband  ;
But  for  yourself,  you  speak  not  from  your  heart. Alice.  And  if  I  do  not,  sir,  think  I  have  cause. Mosbie.  Pardon  me.  Master  Arden  ;  I  '11  away. Arden.  No,  good  Master  Mosbie.
Alice.   We  shall  have  guests  enough,  though  you  go hence.  200
Mosbie.  I  pray  you,  Master  Arden,  let  me  go. Arden.  I  pray  thee,  Mosbie,  let  her  prate  her  fill. Alice.  The  doors  are  open,  sir,  you  may  be  gone. Michael.  — Nay,  that's  a  He,  for  I  have  locked  the  doors. Arden.  Sirrah,  fetch  me  a  cup  of  wine,  I  '11  make  them friends.
And,  gentle  Mistress  Alice,  seeing  you  are  so  stout,
You  shall  begin  !  frown  not,  I  '11  have  it  so. Alice.  I  pray  you  meddle  with  that  you  have  to  do. Arden.  Why,  Alice  !  how  can  I  do  too  much  for  him
W^hose  life  I  have  endangered  without  cause.''     210 Alice.  'Tis  true  ;   and,  seeing  'twas  partly  through  my means,
I  am  content  to  drink  to  him  for  this  once.
Here,  Master  Mosbie  !  and  I  pray  you,  henceforth
Be  you  as  strange  to  me  as  I  to  you.
Your  company  hath  purchased  me  ill  friends, 91
ACT  V.  sc.  1.  Arden  of  Feversham
And  I  for  you,  God  knows,  have  undeserved Been  ill  spoken  of  in  every  place  ; Therefore  henceforth  frequent  my  house  no  more. Mosbie.  I  '11  see  your  husband  in  despite  of  you.
Yet,  Arden,  I  protest  to  thee  by  heaven,  220
Thou  ne'er  shalt  see  me  more  after  this  night, I  '11  go  to  Rome  rather  than  be  forsworn. Af'den.  Tush,  I  '11  have  no  such  vows  made  in  my  house. Alice.  Yes,  I  pray  you,  husband,  let  him  swear  ;
And,  on  that  condition,  Mosbie,  pledge  me  here. Mosbie.  Ay,  as  willingly  as  I  mean  to  live. Arde7i.  Come,  Alice,  is  our  supper  ready  yet  ? Alice.  It  will  by  then  you  have  played  a  game  at  tables. Arden.  Come,  Master  Mosbie,  what  shall  we  play  for? Mosbie.  Three  games  for  a  French  crown,  sir,  and  please you.  230
Arden.  Content.
[  Then  they  play  at  the  tables.     Enter  Will and  Shakebag. Will.  — Can   he  not  take  him  yet?   what  a  spite   is
that? Alice.  — Not  yet,  Will ;  take  heed  he  see  thee  not. Will.  — I  fear  he  will  spy  me  as  I  am  coming. Michael.  — To  prevent  that,  creep  betwixt  my  legs. Mosbie.  One  ace,  or  else  I  lose  the  game. Arden.  Marry,  sir,  there 's  two  for  failing. Mosbie.  Ah,  Master  Arden,  *  now  I  can  take  you.'
\l^hen  Will  pulls  him  down  with  a  towel. 92
Arden  of  Feversham  act  v.  sc.  i.
Arden.  Mosbie  !  Michael !  Alice  !  what  will  you  do  ? Will.  Nothing  but  take  you  up,  sir,  nothing  else.        240 Mosbie.  There 's  for  the  pressing  iron  you  told  me  of.
\Stabs  kim. Shakebag.  And  there 's  for  the  ten  pound  in  my  sleeve.
\Stabs  him. Alice.    What  !    groans  thou  ?   nay,   then  give  me  the weapon  ! Take  this  for  hindering  Mosbie's  love  and  mine.
l^She  stabs  him. Michael.  O,  mistress  ! Will.  Ah,  that  villain  will  betray  us  all. Mosbie.  Tush,  fear  him  not ;  he  will  be  secret. Michael.  Why,  dost  thou  think  I  will  betray  myself? Shakebag.  In  Southwark  dwells  a  bonny  northern  lass, The  widow  Chambly  ;  I  '11  to  her  house  now,       250 And  if  she  will  not  give  me  harborough, I  '11  make  booty  of  the  quean  even  to  her  smock. Will.  Shift  for  yourselves  ;  we  two  will  leave  you  now. Alice.  First  lay  the  body  in  the  counting-house.
\Then  they  lay  the  body  in  the  Cou7iting-house. Will.  We  have  our  gold  ;  Mistress  Alice,  adieu  ; Mosbie,  farewell,  and  Michael,  farewell  too.
\Exeunt.
Enter  Susan.
Susan.  Mistress,  the  guests  are  at  the  doors.
Hearken,  they  knock  :  what,  shall  I  let  them  in  ? 93
ACT  V.  sc.  X.  Arden  of  Feversham
Alice.  Mosbie,  go  thou  and  bear  them  company.
{Exit  Mosbie.
And,  Susan,  fetch  water  and  wash  away  this  blood.
Susan.  The  blood  cleaveth  to  the  ground  and  will  not
out.  261
Alice.  But  with  my  nails  I  '11  scrape  away  the  blood  ; —
The  more  I  strive,  the  more  the  blood  appears  ! Susan.  What's  the  reason,  Mistress,  can  you  tell  ? Alice.  Because  I  blush  not  at  my  husband's  death.
Here  enters  Mosbie.
Mosbie.  How  now  ?  what 's  the  matter  ?  is  all  well  ? Alice.  Ay,  well,  if  Arden  were  alive  again.
In  vain  we  strive,  for  here  his  blood  remains. Mosbie.  Why,  strew  rushes  on  it,  can  you  not  ?
This  wench  doth  nothing  :  fall  unto  the  work.      270 yilice.  'Twas  thou  that  made  me  murder  him. Mosbie.  What  of  that  }
Alice.  Nay,  nothing,  Mosbie,  so  it  be  not  known. Mosbie.  Keep  thou  it  close,  and  'tis  unpossible. Alice.  Ah,  but  I  cannot !  was  he  not  slain  by  me?
My  husband's  death  torments  me  at  the  heart. Mosbie.  It  shall  not  long  torment  thee,  gentle  Alice ;
I  am  thy  husband,  think  no  more  of  him.
Here  enters  Adam  Fowle  and  Bradshaw.
Bradshaw.  How  now, Mistress  Arden?  what  ail  you  weep?
Mosbie.  Because  her  husband  is  abroad  so  late.  280
94
Arden  of  Feversham  act  v.  sc.  i.
A  couple  of  ruffians  threatened  him  yesternight. And  she,  poor  soul,  is  afraid  he  should  be  hurt. Adam.  Is 't  nothing  else  ?  tush,  he  '11  be  here  anon.
Here  enters  Greene.
Greene.  Now,  Mistress  Arden,  lack  you  any  guests  ? Alice.  Ah,  Master  Greene,  did  you  see  my  husband  lately? Greene.  I  saw  him  walking  behind  the  Abbey  even  now.
Here  enters  Franklin.
Alice.  I  do  not  like  this  being  out  so  late. —
Master  Franklin,  where  did  you  leave  my  husband  ?
Franklin.  Believe  me  I  saw  him  not  since  morning.
Fear  you  not,  he'll  come  anon  ;  meantime  290
You  may  do  well  to  bid  his  guests  sit  down.
Alice.  Ay,  so  they  shall ;  Master  Bradshaw,  sit  you  there ; I  pray  you,  be  content,  I  '11  have  my  will. Master  Mosbie,  sit  you  in  my  husband's  seat.
Michael.  — Susan,  shall  thou  and  I  wait  on  them  ? Or,  an  thou  sayest  the  word,  let  us  sit  down  too.
Susan.  — Peace,  we  have  other  matters  now  in  hand. I  fear  me,  Michael,  all  will  be  bewrayed.
Michael.  — Tush,  so  it  be  known  that  I  shall  marry  thee in  the  morning,  I  care  not  though  I  be  hanged  ere night.  But  to  prevent  the  worst,  I'll  buy  some ratsbane.  301
Susan.  — Why,  Michael,  wilt  thou  poison  thyself?
Michael.  — No,  but  my  mistress,  for  I  fear  she'll  tell. 95
ACT  V.  sc.  I.  Arden  of  Feversham
Susan.  — Tush,  Michael ;  fear  not  her,  she's  wise  enough.
Mosbie.  Sirrah  Michael,  give's  a  cup  of  beer. — Mistress  Arden,  here  's  to  your  husband.
Alice.  My  husband !
Franklin.  What  ails  you,  woman,  to  cry  so  suddenly  ?
Alice.  Ah,  neighbours,  a  sudden  qualm  came  o'er  my heart ; My  husband  being  forth  torments  my  mind.         310 I  know  something 's  amiss,  he  is  not  well ; Or  else  I  should  have  heard  of  him  ere  now.
Mosbie.  — She  will  undo  us  through  her  foolishness.
Greene.  Fear  not.  Mistress  Arden,  he's  well  enough.
Alice.  Tell  not  me  ;  I  know  he  is  not  well : He  was  not  wont  for  to  stay  thus  late. Good  Master  Franklin,  go  and  seek  him  forth, And  if  you  find  him,  send  him  home  to  me, And  tell  him  what  a  fear  he  hath  put  me  in.
Fra7tklin.  — I  like  not  this  ;  I  pray  God  all  be  well.  320 I  '11  seek  him  out,  and  find  him  if  I  can.
[Exeunt  Franklin,  Mosbie,  and  Greene.
Alice.  — Michael,  how  shall  I  do  to  rid  the  rest  away?
Michael.  — Leave  that  to  my  charge,  let  me  alone. 'Tis  very  late.  Master  Bradshaw, And  there  are  many  false  knaves  abroad, And  you  have  many  narrow  lanes  to  pass.
Bradshaw.  Faith,  friend  Michael,  and  thou  sayest  true. Therefore  I  pray  thee  light 's  forth  and  lend 's  a  link. \Exeunt  Bradshaw,  Adam,  and  Michael. 96
Arden  of  Feversham  act  v.  sc.  i.
Alice.  Michael,  bring  them  to  the  doors,  but  do  not  stay  ; You  know  I  do  not  love  to  be  alone.  330
— Go,  Susan,  and  bid  thy  brother  come  : But  wherefore  should  he  come?     Here  is  nought
but  fear ; Stay,  Susan,  stay,  and  help  to  counsel  me. Susan.  Alas.  I  counsel  !  fear  frights  away  my  wits.
\Then  they  open  the  counting-house  door^ and  look  upon  Arden. Alice.  See,  Susan,  where  thy  quondam  master  lies. Sweet  Arden,  smeared  in  blood  and  filthy  gore. Susan.  My  brother,  you,  and  I  shall  rue  this  deed. Alice.  Come,  Susan,  help  to  lift  his  body  forth, And  let  our  salt  tears  be  his  obsequies.
Here  enters  Mosbie  a?id  Greene.
Mosbie.  How  now,  Alice,  whither  will  you  bear  him  ? Alice.  Sweet  Mosbie,  art  thou  come  ?  Then  weep  that  will:
I  have  my  wish  in  that  I  joy  thy  sight.  342
Greene.  Well,  it  behoves  us  to  be  circumspect. Mosbie.  Ay,  for  Franklin  thinks  that  we  have  murdered
him. Alice.  Ay,  but  he  cannot  prove  it  for  his  life.
We  '11  spend  this  night  in  dalliance  and  in  sport.
Here  enters  Michael.
Michael.  O  mistress,  the  Mayor  and  all  the  watch
Are  coming  towards  out  house  with  glaives  and  bills 97
ACT  V.  sc.  I.  Arden  of  Feversham
Alice.  Make  the  door  fast ;  let  them  not  come  in. Mosbie.  Tell  me,  sweet  Alice,  how  shall  I  escape  ?      350 Alice.  Out  at  the  back-door,  over  the  pile  of  wood,
And  for  one  night  lie  at  the  Flower-de-luce. Mosbie.  That  is  the  next  way  to  betray  myself. Greene.  Alas,  Mistress  Arden,  the  watch  will  take  me  hers,
And  cause  suspicion,  where  else  would  be  none. Alice.  Why,  take  that  way  that  Master  Mosbie  doth  ;
But  first  convey  the  body  to  the  fields.
\Then  they  bear  the  body  into  the  fields. Mosbie.  Until  to-morrow,  sweet  Alice,  now  farewell :
And  see  you  confess  nothing  in  any  case. Greene.  Be  resolute.  Mistress  Alice,  betray  us  not,      360
But  cleave  to  us  as  we  will  stick  to  you.
\Exeimt  Mosbie  ajid  Greene- Alice.  Now,  let  the  judge  and  juries  do  their  worst :
My  house  is  clear,  and  now  I  fear  them  not. Susan.  As  we  went,  it  snowed  all  the  way.
Which  makes  me  fear  our  footsteps  will  be  spied. Alice.  Peace,  fool,  the  snow  will  cover  them  again. Susan.  But  it  had  done  before  we  came  back  again. Alice.  Hark,  hark,  they  knock  !  go,  Michael,  let  them  in.
Here  enters  the  Mayor  and  the  Watch.
How   now.  Master  Mayor,  have  you  brought   my husband  home  ? Mayor.  I  saw  him  come  into  your  house  an  hour  ago.  370 Alice.  You  are  deceived  ;  it  was  a  Londoner. 98
Arden  of  Feversham  act  v.  sc.  x.
Mayor.  Mistress  Arden,  know  you  not  one  that  is  called
Black  Will  ? Alice.  I  know  none  such  :  what  mean  these  questions  ? Mayor.  I  have  the  Council's  warrant  to  apprehend  him. Alice.  — I  am  glad  it  is  no  worse.
Why,  Master  Mayor,  think  you  I  harbour  any  such  ? Mayor.  We  are  informed  that  here  he  is  ;
And  therefore  pardon  us,  for  we  must  search. Alice.   Ay,  search,  and  spare  you  not,  through  every room  :
Were  my  husband  at  home,  you  would  not  offer this.  380
Here  enters  Franklin.
Master  Franklin,  what  mean  you  come  so  sad  ? Franklin.  Arden,  thy  husband  and  my  friend,  is  slain. Alice.  Ah,  by  whom  ?  Master  Franklin,  can  you  tell  ? Franklin.  I  know  not ;  but  behind  the  Abbey
There  he  lies  murdered  in  most  piteous  case. Mayor.  But,  Master  Franklin,  are  you  sure  'tis  he  ? Franklin.  I  am  too  sure  ;  would  God  I  were  deceived. Alice.  Find  out  the  murderers,  let  them  be  known. Franklin.  Ay,  so  they  shall :  come  you  along  with  us. Alice.  Wherefore  ?  390
Franklin.  Know  you  this  hand-towel  and  this  knife  ? Susan.  — Ah,  Michael,  through  this  thy  negligence
Thou  hast  betrayed  and  undone  us  all. Michael.  — I  was  so  afraid  I  knew  now  what  I  did  :
I  thought  I  had  thrown  them  both  into  the  well. H  99
ACT  V.  sc.  I.  Arden  of  Feversham
Alice.  It  is  the  pig's  blood  we  had  to  supper.
But  wherefore  stay  you?  find  out  the  murderers. Mayor.  I  fear  me  you  '11  prove  one  of  them  yourself. Alice.  I  one  of  them  ?  what  mean  such  questions  ? Franklin.  I  fear  me  he  was  murdered  in  this  house  400
And  carried  to  the  fields  ;  for  from  that  place
Backwards  and  forwards  may  you  see
The  print  of  many  feet  within  the  snow.
And  look  about  this  chamber  where  we  are,
And  you  shall  find  part  of  his  guiltless  blood  ;
For  in  his  slipshoe  did  I  find  some  rushes,
Which  argueth  he  was  murdered  in  this  room. Mayor.  Look  in  the  place  where  he  was  wont  to  sit.
See,  see  !  his  blood  !  it  is  too  manifest. Alice.  It  is  a  cup  of  wine  that  Michael  shed.  410
Michael.  Ay,  truly.
Franklin.  It  is  his  blood,  which,  strumpet,   thou  hast shed.
But  if  I  live,  thou  and  thy  'complices
Which  have  conspired  and  wrought  his  death  shall rue  it. Alice.  Ah,  Master  Franklin,  God  and  heaven  can  tell
I  loved  him  more  than  all  the  world  beside.
But  bring  me  to  him,  let  me  see  his  body. Franklin.  Bring  that  villain  and  Mosbie's  sister  too  ;
And  one  of  you  go  to  the  Flower-de-luce,
And  seek  for  Mosbie,  and  apprehend  him  too.    420
\Exeunt. 100
Arden  of  Feversham  act  v.  sc.  2.
SCENE  II A?i  obscure  street  in  London. Here  enters  Shakebag  solus.
Shakebag.  The  widow  Chambly  in  her  husband's  days  I
kept; And  now  he 's  dead,  she  is  grown  so  stout She  will  not  know  her  old  companions. I  came  thither,  thinking  to  have  had  harbour As  I  was  wont,
And  she  was  ready  to  thrust  me  out  at  doors  ; But  whether  she  would  or  no,  I  got  me  up, And  as  she  followed  me,  I  spurned  her  down  the
stairs, And  broke  her  neck,  and  cut  her  tapster's  throat, And  now  I  am  going  to  fling  them  in  the  Thames. I  have  the  gold  ;  what  care  I  though  it  be  known! I  '11  cross  the  water  and  take  sanctuary.
\Exit.
lOZ
ACT  V.  sc.  3.  Arden  of  Feversham
SCENE  III Arden' s  House  at  Feversham.
Here  enters  the  Mayor,  Mosbie,  Alice,  Franklin, Michael,  and  Susan.
Mayor.  See,  Mistress  Arden,  where  your  husband  lies  ; Confess  this  foul  fault  and  be  penitent.
Alice.  Arden,  sweet  husband,  what  shall  I  say?
The  more  I  sound  his  name,  the  more  he  bleeds  ; This  blood  condemns  me,  and  in  gushing  forth Speaks  as  it  falls,  and  asks  me  why  I  did  it. Forgive  me,  Arden  :  I  repent  me  now, And,  would  my  death  save  thine,  thou  should'st  not
die. Rise  up,  sweet  Arden,  and  enjoy  thy  love, And  frown  not  on  me  when  we  meet  in  heaven  :    10 In  heaven  I  '11  love  thee,  though  on  earth  I  did  not
Mayor.  Say,  Mosbie,  what  made  thee  murder  him  ?
Franklin.  Study  not  for  an  answer  ;  look  not  down  : His  purse  and  girdle  found  at  thy  bed's  head Witness  sufficiently  thou  didst  the  deed  ; It  bootless  is  to  swear  thou  didst  it  not.
Mosbie.  I  hired  Black  Will  and  Shakebag,  ruffians  both, And  they  and  I  have  done  this  murderous  deed. But  wherefore  stay  we  ?    Come  and  bear  me  hence. 1 02
Arden  of  Feversham  act  v.  sc.  4.
Franklin.  Those  ruffians  shall  not  escape  ;  I  will  up  to London,  20
And  get  the  Councirs  warrant  to  apprehend  them.
[Exeunt.
SCENE  IV
The  Kentish  Coast.
Here  enters  Will.
Will.  Shakebag,  I  hear,  hath  taken  sanctuary, But  I  am  so  pursued  with  hues  and  cries For  petty  robberies  that  I  have  done, That  I  can  come  unto  no  sanctuary. Therefore  must  I  in  some  oyster-boat At  last  be  fain  to  go  on  board  some  hoy. And  so  to  Flushing.     There  is  no  staying  here. At  Sittingburgh  the  watch  was  like  to  take  me, And  had  not  I  with  my  buckler  covered  my  head. And  run  full  blank  at  all  adventures,  10
I  am  sure  I  had  ne'er  gone  further  than  that  place  ; For  the  constable  had  twenty  warrants  to  appre- hend me. Besides  that,  I  robbed  him  and  his  man  once  at
Gadshill. Farewell,  England  ;  I  '11  to  Flushing  now.
\Exit  Will, 103
ACT  V.  sc.  s.  Arden  of  Feversham
SCENE  V
Justice-room  at  Feversham,
Here  enters  the  Mayor,  Mosbie,  Alice ^  Michael,  Susan^ and  Bradshaw.
Mayor.  Come,  make  haste  and  bring  away  the  prisoners.
Bradshaw.  Mistress  Arden,  you  are  now  going  to  God, And  I  am  by  the  law  condemned  to  die About  a  letter  I  brought  from  Master  Greene, I  pray  you,  Mistress  Arden,  speak  the  truth  : Was  I  ever  privy  to  your  intent  or  no.
Alice.  What  should  I  say?    You  brought  me  such  a a  letter, But  I  dare  swear  thou  knewest  not  the  contents. Leave  now  to  trouble  me  with  worldly  things, And  let  me  meditate  upon  my  saviour  Christ,         ic Whose  blood  must  save  me  for  the  blood  I  shed.
Mosbie.  How  long  shall  I  live  in  this  hell  of  grief? Convey  me  from  the  presence  of  that  strumpet.
Alice.  Ah,  but  for  thee  I  had  never  been  a  strumpet. What  cannot  oaths  and  protestations  do, When  men  have  opportunity  to  woo  ? I  was  too  young  to  sound  thy  villainies, But  now  I  find  it  and  repent  too  late. 104
Arden  of  Feversham  act  v.  sc.  5.
Susan.  Ah,  gentle  brother,  wherefore  should  I  die  ?
I  knew  not  of  it  till  the  deed  was  done.  20
Mosbie.  For  thee  I  mourn  more  than  for  myself ;
But  let  it  suffice,  I  cannot  save  thee  now. Michael.  And  if  your  brother  and  my  mistress
Had  not  promised  me  you  in  marriage,
I  had  ne'er  given  consent  to  this  foul  deed. Mayor.  Leave  to  accuse  each  other  now,
And  listen  to  the  sentence  I  shall  give.
Bear  Mosbie  and  his  sister  to  London  straight,
Where  they  in  Smithfield  must  be  executed ;
Bear  Mistress  Arden  unto  Canterbury,  30
Where  her  sentence  is  she  must  be  burnt ;
Michael  and  Bradshaw  in  Feversham  must  suffer death. Alice.  Let  my  death  make  amends  for  all  my  sins. Mosbie.  Fie  upon  women  !  this  shall  be  my  song  ;
But  bear  me  hence,  for  I  have  lived  too  long. Susan.  Seeing  no  hope  on  earth,  in  heaven  is  my  hope. Michael.  Faith,  I  care  not,  seeing  I  die  with  Susan. Bradshaw.   My  blood  be  on  his  head  that  gave  the
sentence. Mayor.  To  speedy  execution  with  them  all  I       \Exeunt.
105
ACT  V.  sc.  6.  Arden  of  Feversham
SCENE  VI
Here  enters  Franklin,
Franklin.  Thus  have  you  seen  the  truth   of  Arden's death. As  for  the  ruffians,  Shakebag  and  Black  Will, The  one  took  sanctuary,  and,  being  sent  for  out, Was  murdered  in  Southwark  as  he  passed To  Greenwich,  where  the  Lord  Protector  lay. Black  Will  was  burned  in  Flushing  on  a  stage  ; Greene  was  hanged  at  Osbridge  in  Kent ; The  painter  fled  and  how  he  died  we  know  not. But  this  above  the  rest  is  to  be  noted  : Arden  lay  murdered  in  that  plot  of  ground  lo
Which  he  by  force  and  violence  held  from  Reede  ; And  in  the  grass  his  body's  print  was  seen Two  years  and  more  after  the  deed  was  done. Gentlemen,   we    hope  you'll    pardon    this    naked
tragedy, Wherein  no  fil^d  points  are  foisted  in To  make  it  gracious  to  the  ear  or  eye  ; For  simple  truth  is  gracious  enough, And  needs  no  other  points  of  glosing  stuff.      {Exit.
1 06
GLOSSARY
Abhors  from,  differs  entirely  from;
I.  54 ;    an  uncommon    use.     Dr. Murray  quotes i^(7jr,  A.  and  M.  \
II.  357,    '  It  did  nothing   at    all abhor  from  nature.'
Angel,  the  coin  of  that  name ;  ii.  i.
89,  etc. Arming  sword,  a  large  two-handed
sword,  V.  i.  72.
Basilisk,  a  fabulous  serpent  sup- posed to  kill  by  its  look,  a  cocka- trice ;  I.  215.  Cf.  'Would  they were  basilisks  to  strike  thee  dead.' — Richard  III.,  111.  ii.  151.
Bedeem,  forbode,   '  doom  me  to '  ;
III.  iii.   31 ;    not  quoted   by  Dr. Murray.
Bedesman,  one  who  says  prayers for  another,  '  humble  servant';  iii. vi.  120.
Berayed,  befouled  ;  iv.  iii.  58.  Cf. '  Was  ever  man  so  rayed.' — Shrew,
IV.  i.  3.
Bewrayed,  betrayed  ;  iii.  ii.  27.
Blab,  talk  ;  i.  135.  Used  both  as  a noun  and  a  verb.
Block,  obstacle  ;  i.  137.
Bodkin,  a  tailor's  awl ;  i.  313.
Bolstered,  matted  with  blood  ;  iii. i.  73.  Cf.  'Blood-bolstered  Ban- quo.' — Macbeth,  iv.  i.  123.
Botcher,  a  jobbing  tailor;  i.  25, 316.  Cf.  Huloet,  '  A  tailor,  bod- ger,  botcher,  mender  or  patcher  of old  garments.'
Brable,  quarrel ;  iv.  1.  77.
Brok  AGE,  petty  dealing;  here  espe- cially dealing  in  old  clothes  ;  l.  26.
Bugs,  hobgoblins  :  in.  ii.  19.
Causeless,    adv.,   without    cause,     Flaw,  gust  of  wind  ;  iv.  iv.  44. I.  358.  FoRSLOWED,    delayed ;   iii.    v.  85.
107
Chops  me  in,  interrupts  suddenly ;
III.  vi.  130  ; '  me '  is  a  dative  ;  chop is  used  in  the  sense  of  doing quickly.  Cf.  Richard  III.,  i.  iv. 160,  'Then  we  will  chop  him  in the  malmsey  butt.'
Coil,  trouble  ;  in.  vi.  5.
CoiSTRiL,  a  paltry  young  fellow ; IIL  ii.  41,  58.  Cf.  Twelfth  Night, I.  iii.  43,  '  A  coward  and  a  coistril.'
CoPESMATE,  market-mate,  com- panion ;  III.  V.  104  Cf.  Lucrece, 925,  '  Misshapen  Time,  copesmate of  ugly  Night.'
CoLTSTAFF,  a  Staff  used  by  two persons  for  carrying  'cowls,'  i.e. tubs  ;  v.i.  22.  a.  Merry  Wives,  in. iii.  156,  'Where's  the  cowlstaff?'
Costard,  head ;  v.  i.  63  ;  literally  a large  ribbed  apple.  Frequent  in Shakespeare.
Crown,  crown-piece;  in.  vi.  132.
Curst,  shrewish ;  iv.  ii.  12.
Cutter,  bully,  cutthroat ;   i.  522  ;
IV.  iii.  74,  etc.  Cf.  Harrison's England,  11.  16,  '  Some  desperate cutters  we  have.'
Dag,  pistol;   in.  vi.  9,  131.     The
derivation  is  not  known. Dallying,  delaying,  trifling;  i.  397. Dispose,  disposal ;  i.  606.  Common
in  Shakespeare. Distressful,  miserable  :  in.  v.  56 ;
IV.  iv.  51.    Cf.  Henry  V.,  iv.  i.  287,
'  Crammed  with  distressful  bread.' Drifts,  plots  ;  i.  178,  450,  etc.
Ear,  plough  \  in.  v.  24. Eschew,  avoid ;  i.  347.
GLOSSARY
Cf.  3  Henry  F/,,  ii.  iii,  56,  '  For-
slow  no  longer.' Foster,  forester ;  in.  iii.  13. Frolic,  used  as  an  exclamation =
'cheer  up';_i,   512.      Cf.   Kyd's
JeronitnOf  i.  i.  i.
GiGLOT,  a  wanton  woman,  in.  v.  87  ;
connected  with  'giggle.' Glaives,  swords  ;  v.  i.  348. Glosing,  wordy  ;  v.  vi.  18.
Handsel,  confirm,  seal ;  11.  i.  117. Harborough,  old  form  of  harbour ;
V.  i.  251. HORNSBY,  cuckold ;  IV.  iii.  76. HouGHT,   hocked    or   hamstrung  ;
IV.  iii.  38.
Impetrate,  get  by  asking ;  11.  ii.  16.
Jets,  struts;  I.  30.  Cf.  Cymbeline, III.  iii.  4, '  Giants  may  jet  through.'
Lav  it  on,  fall  to  work ;  v.  i.  50. Cf.  Winter's  Tale,  iv.  iii.  43, '  My  father  hath  made  her  mistress of  the  feast  and  she  lays  it  on.'
Leave,  cease  ;  iii.  vi.  72,  etc.
LoRDAiNE,  clown,  IV.  i.  58.
MiSEVKNT,  mishap ;  iv.  iv.  49.
Mistaking,  misunderstanding ;  iv. i.  27.
MiTHRiDATE,  antidote ;  i.  383. Called  after  the  famous  King  of Pontus,  who  made  himself  poison- proof.     Greene  uses  the  word.
MuscADO,  musket ;  in.  vi.  20.
MuTCHADO,  moustache ;  n.  i.  54.
Pantofles,  slippers ;  11.  ii.  9. Passionate,  sorrowful ;  iii.  v.  45,
Cf.  John  II.,   544,    'She  is   sad
and  passionate.' Planchers,     planks  ;      i.      42.
'Planched'  is  found  in  Measure
for  Measure,  iv.  i.  3.
Arden  of  Feversham
Platform,    scheme  ;    n.    i.     100.
Cf  I  Henry  VI.,  11.  i.  77. Precisian,  puritan  ;  in.  li.  18. Prick-eared,  in.  ii.  62 ;  cf.  Henry
v.,  II.  i.  44,  'Prick-eared  cur  of
Iceland.'
Qualm,  fit  of  nausea ;  in,  vi  67 ;
V.  i.  309. Quarterage,  quarterly  payment;
n.  ii.  98.
Race,  raze  down  ;  i.  47,  118. Religious,  devout ;  i.  587.
Sconce,  small  fort ;  v.  i.  70. Securely,  without  misgiving ;  i.  50. Slipshoe,  slipper  ;  v.  i.  406. Standings,     place     of     vantage,
ambush  ;  in.  vi.  38. Stout,  proud,  overbearing ;  v.  i.  206,
ii.  2.    Cf.  '  I  will  be  strange,  stout,
in     yellow    stockings.'— Tiy^^/A
Night,  II.  V.    185,  and  2   Henry
VI.,  I.  i.  187. Sullens,  moroseness  ;  iv.   iv.  108,
Cf.  Richard II.,  \\.  \.  139:  'Let
them  die  that    age    and   sullens
have.' Sure,  betrothed  ;  i.  151.    Cf.  Merry
Wives,  v.  V.  237. Suspect,  suspicion ;  i.  i.  130.    Cf.
Sonnet  _  lxx.    '  I'he  ornament  of
beauty  is  suspect.'
Ticing,  enticing;  i.  197.
Tkug,  a  drab  ;  i.  499.     Greene  uses
the  word. Tkull,  worthless  woman  ;  i.  498. Truss,  tie  up  for  hanging ;  in.  vi.
125  ;  here= '  get  yourself  trussed.'
Watchet,  pale  blue  ;  n.  i.  56.
Wager,  give  a  wage  to ;  i.  523. Shakespeare  uses  'wage'  in  this sense,  Coriolanus,  v.  vi.  40.
Whistly,  silently  ;  in.  iii.  9.
Yeomanry,  homespun  wit ;  iv.  ii.  37*
108
NOTES
In  the  Quartos  there  are  no  divisions  of  acts  and  scenes.
A,  B,  C=ist,  2nd,  and  3rd  Quartos.
I.  i.  4,  Patents ;  the  plural  is  always  used  in  A,  of.  Richard  II. II.  i.  202  ;  II.  iii.  130.
I.  i.  14.  Contrast  Holinshed : — 'He,  i.e.  Arden,  was  contented to  wink  at  her  filthy  disorder,'  and  Wardmote  Book  : — '  All  which things  the  said  Ardern  did  well  know  and  wilfully  did  permit  and suffer  the  same.'  He  was  afraid  to  offend  Lord  North,  'father- in-law  unto  Alice  Ardern,'  whose  servant  Mosbie  had  been.  This North  was  the  father  of  the  translator  of  Plutarch.
I.  i.  15.  Pass ;  so  BuUen  for  past,  A,  B,  C.
I.  i.  25.  Botcher,  is  not  'butcher,'  but  a  mender  of  old  clothes,
I.  i.  48.  Jealous :  spelt  jelyouse,  and  pronounced  so  throughout the  play.
I.  i.  60.  The  reference  is  to  Ovid's  Elegy,  '  Ad  Aurorara  ne  pro- peret.' — Amor.  i.  13.
I.  i.  61.  Most  editions  reject  often.  If  we  retain  it  the  line  is  an Alexandrine.     Cf.  i.  153,  167,  238,  479 ;  iii.  v.  72»  etc.
I.  i.  105.  Flower-de-luce.  '  An  inn,  formerly  situated  in  Abbey Street,  nearly  opposite  Arden's  house.'  C.  E.  Donne,  An  Essay on  the  Tragedy  of  Arden  of  Faversham,  1873.
I.  i.  117.  thy  house  of  force,  i.e.  'fortified  house.'
I.  i.  135.  narrow :  so  all  editors  ;  but  the  marrow-prying  of  A may  be  correct.  Blab  is  either  a  verb  with  and  omitted  after  it, or  a  noim,  the  subject  of  hinder.
I.  i.  154.  An  allusion  to  verses  or  inscriptions  on  tapestry  hangings. I.  i.  159.  Cf.  '  I'll  write  to  him  a  very  taunting  letter.' — As  You Like  It,  III.  V.  134.
I,  i.  167,  '  It  was  popularly  supposed  that  a  virgin  might  save  a criminal  from  the  gallows  by  offering  to  marry  hira. — See  note  to my  edition  of  Marston,  in.  190-1.'— BuUen. 109
NOTES  Arden  of  Feversham
I.  i.  172.  Perhaps  worth  should  be  omitted.
I.  i.  174.  Bolton  is  '  Boughton,  looking  down  on  Canterbury.' — Donne.
I.  i.  247,  The  name  '  Clarke '  is  apparently  our  author's  invention, like  the  name  and  character  of  Franklin.  The  painter's  name  was William  Blackburn.
I.  i.  266.  Leave ;  Tyrrell  reads  love.
I.  i.  278.  makes  :  this  singular  with  a  plural  subject  is  frequent  in our  play;  cf.  Enters  in  the  stage  directions  with  a  plural,  and I.  151,  437,  502;  II.  i,  i;  III.  i.  43  and  83;  v.  38,  etc.  Consult Mr.  Verity's  note  on  Edward  11. ,  i.  iv.  362,  Temple  Dramatists.
I.  i.  312,  The  statute  in  question  was  37  Edward  ill.  c.  9.
I.  i.  314.  '  The  making  of  Spanish  needles  was  first  taught  in England  by  Elias  Crowse  a  Germane  about  the  eight  yeere  of Queene  Elizabeth,  and  in  Queen  Marie's  time  there  was  a  Negro made  fine  Spanish  needles  in  Cheapeside,  but  would  never  teach his  art  to  any.'  Quoted  by  Bullen  from  Stowe,  edition  1631, p.  1038.
I.  i.  314.  '  Then  Mosby  having  at  his  girdle  a  pressing  iron  of 14  pound  weight  stroke  him  on  the  head  with  the  same  so  that he  fell  down  and  gave  a  great  groan.'— Holinshed.     Cf  V.  i.  241.
I.  i,  323.    Velvet  drudge  :  an  allusion  to  Mosbie's  tailoring.
I.  i.  426.  Populous  :  '  perhaps  used  in  the  sense  of  thick,  compact* — Bullen.  Webster  quotes  this  passage  and  explains,  '  suitable  to common  people:  hence  common,  inferior,  vulgar.'  Delius  pro- poses palpable.
I.  i.  466.  His  in  state,  i.e.  'his  legally,'
I.  i.  472.  Cf.  '  To  wring  the  widow  from  her  customed  right.' —2  Henry  VI.,  V.  i,  188.
!•  i-  537-   Tyrrell  begins  Act  II.  here.
I.  i.  546.  'The  gentleman  is  not  in  your  books.' — Much  Ado, I.  i.  79-
I.  i.  548.  make  a  gree,  come  to  an  agreement.  Agree  was  used adevrbially  for  at  gree,
110
Arden  of  Feversham  notes
II.  i.  51.  Mr.  BuUen  says  that  such  a  line  as  this  '  might  have come  straight  out  of  Tamburlaine.'     He  goes  on,  '  but  in  no  other part  of  the  play  can  we  find  a  trace  of  Marlowe's  influence.'     Cf. — '  He  sent  a  shaggy  tottered  staring  slave, That  when  he  speaks  draws  out  his  grisly  beard, And  winds  it  twice  or  thrice  about  his  ear ; Whose  face  has  been  a  grindstone  for  men's  swords.' Jew  of  Malta,  IV.  v.  6. and  Shakespeare's —
'  They  brought  one  Pinch,  a  hungry  lean-faced  villain  .  ,  . A  needy  hoUow-ey'd,  sharp-looking  wretch, A  living  dead  man.'  Cent,  of  Errors,  v.  i.  237.
II.  i.  56.  all  to  torn  ;  '  entirely  torn.'  To  in  the  sense  of '  asunder '  was  commonly  emphasised  by  all.  Cf.  '  Her  wings  .  .  . were  all  to  ruffled.' — Comus,  380.
II.  i.  58.  seam  rent :  torn  at  the  seams ;  '  Seam  rent  fellows,  — Ben  Jonson. II.  i.  loi.  Imitated  in  Yarington's  Two  Tragedies  (iii.  2) : — '  Grace  me  no  graces,  I  respect  no  grace, But  with  a  grace  to  give  a  graceless  stab.' II.  i.  114.  I  have  ms&nQd  follow.
II,  ii.  3.  Michael's  letter  is  a  curious  effort  at  euphuism  which calls  to  mind  'Love's  Labour's  Lost.'  Note  the  fabulous  natural history,  the  alliteration,  and  the  alliterative  proverb.
II.  ii.  51.  oldfilching=*T2irQ  filching.'  Cf.  '  Yonder 's  old  coil  at hand.' — Muck  Ado,  V.  ii.  98.
II.  ii.  63.  The  Counter  was  a  London  prison.
III,  i.  5.  Couch  dishonour  as  dishonour  buds.     Warnke  explains Coz^cA  =' spread,'    comparing    'couch-grass';    but    there  is  nc authority  for  this  use.     Is  the  word  used  in  its  surgical  sense The  line  would  then='  Cut  the  bud  of  dishonour  so  that  it  bursts into  flower.*    The  surgical  sense  occurs  in  Holland's  Pliny,  1601,
III.  i.  13.  plenished  is  Wamke's  reading  for  the  Quartos'  ferisht, Delias  and  Bullen  read  flourished. Ill
NOTES  Arden  of  Feversham
III.  i.  19.  Cf.  'Sorrow  and  grief  have  vanquished  all  my  powers.' —2  Henry  VI.,  ii.  i.  83.
III.  i.  45.  For  this  use  of  sullen  cf.  '  Why  are  thine  eyes  fixed  to the  sullen  earth?' — 2  Henry  VI.,  I.  ii.  5,  and  Sonnet  xxix.  13.
III.  ii.  47.  A  cockshut  vv^as  a  large  net  used  to  catch  woodcocks after  sunset.     Cf.  'Cockshut  i\m&.'— Richard  III,  v.  iii.  70.
III.  iii.  14.  rounded  w^= brought  me  round.
III.  iii.  40.  use :  Warnke  quotes  Macbeth,  in.  ii.  10,  '  Using  those thoughts  which  should  indeed  have  died.'
III.  iii.  44.  with  the  tide,  i.e.  by  boat  on  the  Thames.  Holin- shed  makes  Greene  and  Black  Will  go  to  London,  from  Gravesend apparently,  '  at  the  tide, '
III.  iv.  18.  '  The  country  near  Rainham  seems  in  the  sixteenth century  to  have  been  so  open  as  to  have  entitled  it  to  the  appella- tion of  a  Down.' — Donne.     The  spot  had  a  bad  reputation.
III.  iv.  25.  The  Salutation  is  an  inn  mentioned  in  Bartholomew Fair.
III.  iv,  31.  Except  is  probably  the  printer's  spelling  oi  accept.
III.  v.  4.  drink  :  perhaps  we  ought  to  read  think.
III.  v.  17.  stirry :  this  is  meant  by  the  starry  of  the  Quartos.
III.  V.  26.  hive :  Delius's  correction  of  heave.  A,  B,  C,
III,  V.  51,  deep  pathaires  :  Delius  conjectures  deepfet  airs ;  but Mr,  Gollancz  has  probably  solved  the  crux  of  the  play  by  his suggestion, — '  "  Pathaire,"  I  take  to  be  some  special  form  of  "  pet- arre,"  z.^.  "petard,"  probably  used  in  the  metaphorical  sense  of passionate  outburst,' — (Lamb's  Specimens,  I.  i.  297,)  The  use  may be  quite  literal ;  for  the  form  cf,  Powell's  Tom  of  All  Trades, p,  163,  'An  Enginere  for  making  of  Patars.'
III.  V.  58,  Quoted  by  BuUen  as  of  'genuine  Shakesperean flavour.*    He  adds  in.  v.  112-130,
III.  v.  116.  Mr.  Bullen  puts  a  comma  at  use.
in.  V.  131.  Thy:  several  editors  read  my  ;  but  the  sense  is  '  the good  turns  I  have  done  you.'
III.  V.  133.  Warnke  explains  '  the  quarrel  has  not  yet  thickened 112
Arden  of  Feversham  notes
to  so  impenetrable  a  fence  as  to  separate  us  for  ever.'     Perhaps  we should  read  '  is  not  thick-set  ill.'
III.  V.  157.  An  inconsistency.  Cf.  II.  i.  75.  Holinshed  quotes from  the  letter,  'We  have  got  a  man  for  our  purpose,  we  may thank  my  brother  Bradshaw.'  The  Wardmote  Book  says  nothing of  Bradshaw's  innocence.
III.  vi.  144.  Shorlow  should  be  Shurland  in  Sheppey.
IV.  i.  I.  gardant :  A,  B  read  gardeant,  modern  editors  guardians. IV.  i.  3.  fath :  so  Warnke  for  pace  of  A,  B,  C  ;  but  face  in  the
sense  of  '  path '  is  not  impossible.
IV.  i.  17.  desires  :  so  Warnke  for  deserves,  A,  B,  C.
IV.  i.  44.  'A  certain  broom-close  betwixt  Feversham  and  the Ferry. ' — Holinshed.
rv.  i.  45.  Cf.  Ecclesiastes,  \\\.  5.
IV.  i.  96.  nor  with  cement :  Delius  for  nor  semell.  A,  B.
IV.  ii.  5.  This  mist  is  not  in  Holinshed.    It  is  our  poet's  invention.
IV.  ii.  30.  Cf.  Midsummer  Night's  Dream,  v.  i.  237,  etc.
IV.  iii.  40.  Hock  Monday  followed  the  second  Sunday  after Easter,     See  Brand's  Popular  Antiquities.
IV.  iii.  68.  Our  poet  blackens  Mosbie  for  the  same  reason  that he  whitewashes  Arden,  e.g.  :  '  Master  Arden  both  then  and  at  other times  had  been  greatly  provoked  by  Mosbie  to  fight  with  him,  but he  would  not.'  'Mosby  at  the  first  would  not  agree  to  that cowardly  murdering  of  him. ' — Holinshed.
IV.  iv.  88.  harehrain,  A,  B,  C.
IV.  iv.  89.  welcome  thee  with  intended ;  so  Warnke  for  welcome thy  intended,  A,  B,  C.
V.  i.  58.  Hilts  is  common  for  'hilt,'  e.g.  in  Malory  and  Shake- speare ;  '  ioth  his  hilts '  is  apparently  an  extension  of  this  use. Locked  I  take  to  mean  '  crossed  or  clashed  swords,'  with  his adversary.
V.  i.  105.  game  or  two  at  tables :  a  sort  of  backgammon. V.  i.  155.    Cf.  the  concluding  lines  of  Ovid's  Elegy,  already alluded  to,  i.  60.
113
NOTES  Arden  of  Feversham
V.  i.  338.  '  Cecily  Pounders  did  help  to  bear  the  dead  corpse  out into  a  meadow  there,  commonly  called  the  Amery  Croft.' —  Ward- mote Book.
V.  iv.  5.  Faversham  was  famous  for  its  oysters.
V.  V.  30.  '  For  the  charges  of  brenning  Mistress  Arden  and execution  of  George  Bradshaw,  XLiiis.' — Canterbury  Records.
V.  vi.  2.  By  the  Wardmote  Book,  '  George  Loosebagg,  i.e. Shakebag,  escaped  at  that  time.'  John  Green,  who  like  Mosbie was  a  tailor,  was  taken  in  July  in  Cornwall  and  brought  to  Favers- ham and  hanged  in  chains  within  the  liberties.  Susan,  in  the play,  combines  the  characters  of  Cecily  Pounder,  Mosbie's  sister, and  of  Elizabeth  Stafford,  the  maid-servant.  Morsby  and  his sister  were  hanged  in  Smithfield  ;  Michael  Saunderson  was  '  drawn and  hanged  in  chains '  in  Faversham,  where  Elizabeth  was  burnt. By  the  Wardmote  Book  Alice  Arden  did  not  stab  her  husband.
Printed  by  T.  and  A.  Constable,  Printers  to  Her  Majesty at  the  Edinburgh  University  Press
000  002  038
